Low-cost LoRa gateway: web admin interface
Prof. Congduc Pham
http://www.univ-pau.fr/~cpham Université de Pau, France

Contents
q This tutorial presents the web admin interface which is an add-on to the low-cost gateway
q Please read first the Low-cost LoRa gateway: a step-by-step tutorial to understand the gateway configuration and architecture
q Note that the SD card image has everything needed, including the web admin interface installed, so you may skip the installation procedure if you flashed the SD card image
q Let’s get started…
2

Gateway web admin interface (1)
q A gateway web admin interface has been added to the latest version
q To install the web admin interface, check if you have the gw_web_admin folder in your lora_gateway folder
q If you don't, then update to the latest version q Then, go into gw_web_admin and run the
install.sh script
q cd gw_web_admin q sudo ./install.sh
3

Gateway web admin interface (2)
q http://192.168.200.1/admin
q Login: admin q Password: loragateway
4

Web admin features

q Currently, you can use the web admin to:

q Update your gateway with the latest github version while preserving your configuration files

q Perform the basic configuration procedure

q Configure the gateway as WiFi client to connect to a WiFi network

q Test Internet connectivity

q Easily reboot and shutdown your gateway

• Be carefull, if you shut down the gateway, you need to physically access the gateway to power it it on again

q Change LoRa mode and frequency

q Set your gateway id and configure alerting system (mail, SMS)

q Change the WiFi SSID and password

q Enable/Disable local AES decryption

q Enable/Disable some selected clouds such as WAZIUP and ThingSpeak

q For ThingSpeak, you can specify a new write key

q For WAZIUP, you can specify the project name, the organization

name, the service tree, the user name,…

5

Gateway main page
q Gateway main page (configuration page)

Check Internet connectivity

Display the last low-level gw status

Reboot the gateway. Need to reboot after any update

Shutdown the gateway
6

Main gateway configuration (1)
q Gateway radio configuration section

Change LoRa mode and set to a customized frequency, e.g. 433.3MHz

Edit PA_BOOST setting. You must use GGaatteewwaayyUupdate/Basic config to recompile
7

Main gateway configuration (2)

q Gateway configuration section
Set gateway ID (should normally be pre-configured)

Set the AES encryption option and the downlink feature

Default id is 000000XXXXXXXXXX with the last 5 bytes of the gateway network interface (e.g. 27EB5A71F7)
The MD5 hash of the gateway's ID

8

Main gateway configuration (3)
Your email account password
q Gateway email alerting section
Enter your mail address for sending emails

The SMTP mail server to send emails

A list of email recipient addresses to receive alert notifications

9

Main gateway configuration (4)
q Gateway SMS alerting section (needs 2G/3G)

The SIM card pin code

A list of mobile phone numbers to receive alert notifications
10

Main gateway configuration (5)

q Gateway generating downlink messages

Destination node, between 2 and 255

The string to send. Can be specific commands for the device if it has been programmed/configured accordingly.
Submit will generate in the downlink folder a downlink-post.txt file with the following entry: {"status":"send_request","dst":2,"data": "hello from gateway"}

More info on https://github.com/CongducPham/LowCostLoRaGw/blob/master/ gw_full_latest/README-downlink.md
11

Main gateway configuration (6)
q Gateway log files section

(2) Click to start the generation of a copy of the log files

(1) Select this tab
Then, this is the link to the entire post-processing.log file
And this is the link to an extract containing the last 500 lines of post-processing.log file
12

Get gateway log files

q The

option is a convenient way

for an end-user to obtain the log file that can be

sent (mail) to an experienced user for analysis or

debug purposes

q The entire post-processing.log file can be obtained, or only the last 500 lines

q This last feature can be used by an unexperienced end-user to see whether data have been recently received from end-devices or not

13

Gateway update
q Your gateway must be updated to the latest version
q Internet access for the gateway is necessary q The update procedure can easily be done with
the web admin interface, connect to the gateway WiFi first q The update steps are
1. Full Update 2. Basic Config 3. Update Web Interface
14

Gateway update page

q Gateway update section
Can download and install a file in the lora_gateway folder. A link to a file should be provided, e.g. a Dropbox link

Update the web admin interface after an update of the distribution to install the last version of the web admin interface.
It is recommended to run UUppddaatteewweebbaaddmminin right after FFuullluuppddaattee or NNeewwiinnssttaalllaattiioonn. Then reload the page.
3

Install a new gateway by removing the existing lora_gateway folder, all existing configuration files will be overwritten.
If you install a new gateway with our SD card image, you can use this option.

1
Update with latest version on github, all your configuration files will be kept. This is the recommended option.

2
Compile and configure the gateway (to set the gateway id & the WiFi access point SSID). This is also required if you install a new gateway using the provided SD card image. It is recommended to run BBaassicicccoonnffigig right after Full update or NNeewwininsstatallalatitoionn.
15

Software version number
q The software version number on github and the installed version number are displayed
q Click on to obtain the latest software version number on github
16

Download & install a file

q The

option is a convenient way

to install a configuration file

q For instance, a customized radio.makefile file can

be edited by an experienced user, then put on

Dropbox and the link provided to an end-user (mail,

SMS,…)

q After installation, the end-user can use "Basic config" to

recompile the gateway program and then reboot

17

Gateway cloud pages

q Gateway cloud configuration section

Provides a quick and easy way to configure selected clouds.

The cloud configuration page is very basic. It is expected that if you want to have more advanced cloud management, you have to use ssh to connect to the gateway and configure it by editing the clouds.json file.

18

Gateway WAZIUP cloud

q Configuring WAZIUP cloud

WAZIUP cloud uses FIWARE platform with the possibility to define domains. The domain will be defined as project_name+''+organization_name+service_tree, e.g. waziup-UPPA-TESTS if: - project_name is waziup, - organization_name is UPPA, - service_tree is –TESTS service_tree can be empty otherwise it must begin with a '-'.

The WAZIUP cloud tab is only available when key_WAZIUP.py is found
The device id will be organization_name+service_tr ee+"_Sensor"+device_addr. For instance, for sensor 2 hosted by UPPA: UPPATESTS_Sensor2.
Username and password of the WAZIUP account. If username is "guest" then all data will be public
19

Gateway system configuration (1)

q Gateway WiFi access point
Set the gateway's access point SSID (should normally be preconfigured, see Update section)
Also allow to define/change the WiFi access point password

If you indicate a customized SSID, it will be preserved when the gateway is updated.

Default SSID is WAZIUP_PI_GW_XXXXXXXXXX with the last 5 bytes of the gateway network interface (e.g. 27EB84C456)
If you want to get back to the default SSID, just copy/paste from here
20

Gateway system configuration (2)

q Configure as WiFi client

Configure the gateway as WiFi client to connect to an existing WiFi network. Changes will take effect after reboot.

Warning: if a valid WiFi network is not configured you will not be able to connect through the gateway's access point anymore. If that happens, use wired Ethernet to switch back to access point mode.

21

Gateway system configuration (3)
q Configure as WiFi Access Point
Configure the gateway as Access Point

Changes will take effect after reboot

Switch to AP mode immediately, you

may loose connection with the gateway

22

Gateway system configuration (4)

q Run the RaspAP module

Run the RaspAP web module from https://github.com/billz/raspap-webgui
Default login is admin and default password is secret

23

Gateway system configuration (5)
q RaspAP can configure some networking functions. It can be useful for dynamically select WiFi networks
q However, it is recommended to use our web admin interface to control WiFi client <-> Access Mode feature 24

Gateway system configuration (6)
q Configure auth for web admin interface
Change both the login and password to access the web admin interface. Default login is admin and default password is loragateway
25

