Narrow-Band Interference Removing Filter for Mobile Communication Systems

Hoon Kang Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, INMC, Seoul National University
Seoul 08826, Korea Email: windoom@ccl.snu.ac.kr

Jong-Seon No Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering, INMC, Seoul National University
Seoul 08826, Korea Email: jsno@snu.ac.kr

Abstract—In wireless communication systems, the received signal is often distorted by narrow-band interference (NBI). Notch ﬁlter is commonly used for removing NBI. In this paper, we propose NBI removing ﬁlter, which is composed of two mixers and one high pass ﬁlter (HPF) to enhance the receiver performance in high NBI environment. Using two mixers and one high pass ﬁlter, the NBI can be removed by down-converting the received signal wherever the NBI is located.

I. INTRODUCTION
Mobile communication systems such as synthetic aperture radar (SAR), 4G mobile broadband, and wireless local area network (WLAN) standards (IEEE 802.11a/g/n/ac) have signiﬁcant performance degradation when there are high narrowband interference (NBI) [1]–[3]. Main reason of the NBI is utilization of the unlicensed bands in many wireless communication standards. These systems are located in the same frequency band with other systems. Much research has been done to remove unwanted NBI [4]–[7].
A simpliﬁed system model of a wireless communication system is illustrated in Fig. 1. In this paper, we will analyze the performance of the single carrier system, because the orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) based system can easily remove the NBI problem by simply erasing the corresponding subcarrier symbol of FFT output. The modulated data passes through the SRRC ﬁlter and the digital-to-analog converter (DAC) to produce band-limited analog signals. The converted analog signal is transmitted in a wireless mobile communication system through a narrow-band channel, which is generally a multipath fading channel. On the receiver, NBI and additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) are added to the received signal. After converting the received analog signal into a digital signal by an analog-to-digital converter (ADC), the digitized received signal is ﬁltered and demodulated by an SRRC ﬁlter. In this paper, we propose the NBI removing ﬁlter by applying the notch ﬁlter which is one of the most commonly used scheme for removing the interference. When using the notch ﬁlter, once the design is completed, it is impossible to change the frequency to be ﬁltered. To avoid this disadvantage, frequency changeable notch ﬁlter can be used. However, in this case, the design complexity of the ﬁlter is increased highly. By using the proposed NBI removing ﬁlter, it is possible to

Fig. 1. A simpliﬁed system model of wireless communication system.
change the frequency to any frequency to be ﬁltered through a low complexity mixer.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, system performance degradation due to NBI is introduced. In Section III, NBI removing ﬁlter is proposed and a performance assessment of the proposed NBI removing in various environments is provided through a numerical analysis. Finally, conclusions are given in Section IV.
II. THE ANALYSIS OF THE PERFORMANCE IN NARROW-BAND INTERFERENCE
To analysis the performance degradation due to NBI, we divide the NBI into three categories which are NBI at the inband, NBI at the band edge, and NBI at the out-of-band as shown in Fig. 2.
Bit error rate (BER) performances for the NBI located at the in-band, band edge, and out-of-band are depicted in Fig. 3, Fig.4, and Fig. 5, respectively. To evaluate the impact of the NBI, we evaluate BER performance with QPSK, 16QAM and 64QAM when the NBI is presented in units of 10dB from 0dB to 100dB. NBI power in the ﬁgure is the relative signal power which is compared to the desired signal. NBI power 0dB means that the power of NBI is same as the average inband power in the frequency domain of the desired signal. In ﬁg. 3, BER performance degradation is observed from NBI power 20dB for QPSK and 16QAM, 10dB for 64QAM when

978-1-5386-4646-5/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

603

ICUFN 2018

Fig. 2. Received signal with 20dB higher NBI.

Fig. 4. BER performance when the NBI is located at the band edge in AWGN channel.

Fig. 3. BER performance when the NBI is located at the in-band in AWGN

channel.

Fig. 5. BER performance when the NBI is located at the out-of-band in

AWGN channel.

the NBI is located at the in-band. In ﬁg. 4, BER performance degradation is observed from NBI power 20dB for QPSK and 16QAM, 0dB for 64QAM when the NBI is located at the band edge. In ﬁg. 5, BER performance degradation is observed from NBI power 70dB for QPSK, 60dB for 16QAM, and 50dB for 64QAM when the NBI is located at the out-of-band. Because even though the NBI is located at the out-of-band, this NBI is folded into in-band during the demodulation process.
III. THE PROPOSED NARROW-BAND INTERFERENCE REMOVING FILTER
The proposed ﬁlter consists of two mixers and one high pass ﬁlter (HPF) as illustrated in ﬁg. 6. The ﬁrst mixer is used to place the NBI in 0Hz, and the second mixer is used to return to the original spectrum after ﬁltering. After down-converting the received signal by the amount of the center frequency of the NBI, the NBI can be removed by the HPF and then the

received signal is up-converted back. In the conventional notch ﬁlter, once the ﬁlter is design, it is impossible to change the frequency to be ﬁltered. To avoid this disadvantage, frequency changeable notch ﬁlter can be used which has very high implementation complexity.
The overall process of the NBI ﬁlter is illustrated in ﬁg. 7. The NBI ﬁlter input signal in (a) of this ﬁgure is frequency shifted by the ﬁrst mixer so that NBI is located at 0 Hz which is depicted in (b). As shown in (c), the frequency shifted signal passes through the HPF and NBI is removed in this process. NBI removed signal is returned to the original frequency by the second mixer as shown in (d).
To reduce the hardware size mixer can be implemented by coordinate rotation digital computer (CORDIC). HPF is designed with stop band frequency 0.001MHz, pass band frequency 0.02MHz, stop band attenuation 50dB, pass band ripple 0.01dB with Chebyshev type 2 which has 5th order

604

Fig. 6. A simpliﬁed system model of the receiver with proposed NBI removing ﬁlter.

Fig. 8. BER performance of the proposed AGC algorithm when the NBI is located at the in-band in AWGN channel.

(a) NBI ﬁlter input signal

(b) First mixer output signal

(c) HPF output signal

(d) Second mixer output signal

Fig. 7. BER performance of the proposed and the conventional SRRC receiver ﬁlters with QPSK, 16QAM, and 64QAM in AWGN channel.

ﬁlter coefﬁcient {1, -1.99999987450149, 1, 1, -1} for feed forward, and {1, -1.99826656741428, 0.998269689373816, 1, -0.998269688023325} for feedback[8].
BER performances for the proposed NBI removing ﬁlter with the NBI located at the in-band, band edge, and out-ofband are depicted in Fig. 8, Fig.9, and Fig. 10, respectively. In ﬁg. 8, BER performance is enhanced when the NBI power is larger than 40dB for QPSK and 16QAM, 30dB for 64QAM when the NBI is located at the in-band. However, if the NBI power is smaller than those mentioned value, BER performance is degraded, because HPF erases the meaningful data. In ﬁg. 9, BER performance is enhanced when the NBI power is larger than 40dB for QPSK and 16QAM, 30dB for 64QAM when the NBI is located at the band edge. However, if the NBI power is smaller than those mentioned value, BER performance is degraded, because HPF erases the meaningful data, which is the same as the NBI is located at the inband. In ﬁg. 10, BER performance degradation is observed from NBI power 80dB for QPSK and 16QAM, and 60dB for 64QAM when the NBI is located at the out-of-band. The

Fig. 9. BER performance of the proposed AGC algorithm when the NBI is located at the band edge in AWGN channel.
BER performance is enhance obviously in this case, because the ﬁltering is done at the out-of-band. From the results, the overall BER performance will be enhanced by switching on the proposed NBI removing ﬁlter for following two cases. The ﬁrst is when the NBI is located at the in-band or at the band edge with 20dB larger power than the desired signal. The second is when the NBI is located at the out-of-band with any power.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new NBI removing ﬁlter by adopting two mixers and one HPF. The proposed NBI removing ﬁlter can enhance the BER performance in high NBI environment. In low NBI environment when the NBI is located at the in-band or at the band edge, BER performance is worse than no ﬁltering, because HPF erases the meaningful data. In order to enhance the overall performance, the proposed NBI

605

Fig. 10. BER performance of the proposed AGC algorithm when the NBI is located at the out-of-band in AWGN channel.
removing ﬁlter is adaptively used according to the power level of the NBI.
Our future work will develop the overall scenario for NBI detection, investigating better HPF coefﬁcient and NBI removing ﬁlter switching mechanism.
REFERENCES
[1] F. Zhou, M. Tao, “Research on methods for narrow-band interference suppression in synthetic aperture radar data,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 3476–3485, Jul. 2015.
[2] H. Al-Tous, I. Barhumi, N. Al-Dhahir, “Narrow-band interference mitigation using compressive sensing for AF-OFDM systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 66, pp. 6146–6159, Jul. 2017.
[3] J. Su, H. Tao, M. Tao, L. Wang, J. Xie, ‘Narrow-band interference suppression via RPCA-based signal separation in timefrequency domain,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing, vol. 10. pp. 5016–5025, Nov. 2017.
[4] T. Lamont-Smith, R. D. Hill, S. D. Hayward, G. Yates, and A. Blake, “Filtering approaches for interference suppression in low-frequency SAR,” IEE Proc. Radar, Sonar and Navig., vol. 153, no. 3, pp. 338–344, Jun. 2006.
[5] F. Zhou, R. Wu, M. Xing, Z. Bao, “Eigensubspace-based ﬁltering with application in narrow-band interference suppression for SAR,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 75–79, Jan. 2007.
[6] F. J. Meyer, J. B. Nicoll, A. P. Doulgeris, “Correction and characterization of radio frequency interference signatures in L-band synthetic aperture radar data,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 4961– 4972, Oct. 2013.
[7] S. Liu, F. Yang. W. Ding, and J. Song, “Double Kill: CompressiveSensing-Based Narrow-Band Interference and Impulseive Noise Mitigatin for Vehicular Communications,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol.65, no.7, pp. 5099–5109, Jul. 2016.
[8] A.V. Oppenheim and R.W. Schafer, Discret-Time Signal Processing, 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson, 2010.
606

