Indian Journal of Science and Technology, Vol 8(S8), 112–117, April 2015

ISSN (Print) : 0974-6846
ISSN (Online) : 0974-5645
DOI: 10.17485/ijst/2015/v8iS8/64233

An Efficient Data Forwarding Scheme for
Internet of Things in Wi-Fi Networks
Won-Shik Na1 and Seok-Hoon Kim2*
Department of Computer Science, Namseoul University, Cheonan, 331-707, South Korea
Department of Mobile Communications Engineering, Changshin University, Changwon, 630-764, South Korea;
shkim@cs.ac.kr
1

2

Abstract
Recent IT technology trends are confronted with a new technological phenomenon. It is the intersection of technology and
liberal arts. That is, IT convergence. Although the convergence trends will keep going in the future, there is the Internet of
Things which are a new priming to accelerate these trends. A multitude of IoT devices will transmit various information
through Internet, and the main channel of information flows will be a Wi-Fi networks. However, current Wi-Fi technology
isn’t prepared to accommodate these data yet. Therefore, we propose the Efficient Data Forwarding Scheme (EDFS) to
solve these problems. The proposed EDFS assigns a proper transmission opportunity (TXOP) to the IoT devices for supporting efficient data transmission. In the EDFA, Wi-Fi AP (Access Point) gives a calculated or pre-defined TXOP, which is
suitable for the data transmission attributes of IoT device. Due to the fact that the data transmission feature of IoT devices
isn’t the real-time traffic in the most cases. Based on the EDFA, a Wi-Fi AP can not only assign an efficient TXOP to a device,
but also support various IoT device requirements within the Wi-Fi hotspot. We compared it with legacy Wi-Fi transmission
scheme to prove the outperforming results by using the OPNet simulator.

Keywords: Data Forwarding, Internet of Things, TXOP, Wi-Fi

1. Introduction
Nowadays, IT infrastructure environments have been
dramatically changed and this trend will be accelerated.
It has been mainly caused by various types of multimedia
data, deepened fluctuation of daily traffic, rapid deployment of cloud computing, huge size data center, spreading
IT-based business and so on. These changes does not only
required a simple and flexible infrastructure scheme, but
also needed super high speed and bandwidth networks
as a necessity. Therefore, the telecommunication service
providers are competitively adopted to gigabit technologies such as gigabit Ethernet, IEEE 802.11ac, etc. from all
over the world. In addition, Internet of Things (IoT) will
be an inevitable and essential technology in the middle

*Author for correspondence

of this trend. Actually, the IoT technology isn’t dropped
it from skies. It has been constantly evolving from RFID
(Radio Frequency IDentification) technology in the past
few years. It just had gotten into a limelight as a next
generation business in recent days. However, the IoT is
a most important and influential technology in the IT
industry and business, because it can be easily adapted to
other industries and businesses. That is, the IoT has been
the eye of a typhoon in the nowadays converged trends.
Although it seems to be evolving with the trends
respectively, these trends are tightly coupled to each
other. Due to the fact that the present ICT infrastructures, which are used to IoT, Wi-Fi, and etc., will pursue
to be changed from hardware based technology to the
efficient and flexible software based technology. That

Won-Shik Na and Seok-Hoon Kim

is, the programmability of topology and behavior, IaaS
(Infrastructure as a Service), virtual infrastructure,
integrated smart infrastructure, interworking to other
network techniques, and so on, will be the main functionalities in the near future1,2.
Actually, the Wi-Fi technology could have died out
the technology in the past few years ago, if there was no
various hand-held devices and the smart phone. However,
it has been continuously spotlighted technology, since
the tremendously increasing wireless data are needed in
the smart phone and hand-held device. These tendencies can’t be out-of-hand thing by only mobile networks
such as LTE (Long Term Evolution), Mobile WiMAX
(Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access), and
etc. This is why the current limelight of Wi-Fi technology
is still continuing. In addition, there is one other important reason. It is the IoT technology because it is not only
causing the explosive effects in the data usages, but also
using the Wi-Fi technology as a fundamental transmission scheme3,4.
In spite of this technical background, the existing
Wi-Fi standards and technologies didn’t consider the data
transmission of IoT devices yet. That is, the IoT devices
are handled a normal station within the Wi-Fi hotspot.
It can be one of the reasons which causes the inefficient
Wi-Fi network throughput, because most of the IoT
devices’ traffic attribute aren’t a real-time feature. To solve
this problem, we propose an efficient data forwarding
scheme, which is very appropriate to the traffic attribute
of IoT devices. The proposed EDFS can assign the proper
TXOP, which dose not only consider a traffic attribute of
IoT device, but also calculated or pre-defined with time
interval, to the IoT devices within the Wi-Fi hotspot.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
2 describes the related works such as Wi-Fi network
technologies and IoT technologies. Section 3 discusses
the proposed scheme and the performance evaluations.
Finally, we offer concluding remarks in Section 4.

2. Related Works
2.1 Wi-Fi Technology
Recently, there are many Wi-Fi technologies such as
Gigabit Wi-Fi, Super Wi-Fi, Wi-Fi Direct, and so on.
Although there are many Wi-Fi standards, technologies,
and applications, the current Wi-Fi evolutions are focused
on the bandwidth expansion, as shown as Table 1.

Vol 8 (S8) | April 2015 | www.indjst.org

The evolution of Wi-Fi technology has mainly led by
some PHY techniques. It means that MAC techniques
didn’t almost change up to now than PHY techniques
relatively. However, there are introducing various MAC
techniques in recent years. Especially, these MAC techniques, which are related to reduce the control frame
overhead and to adjust the back-off time, are focused on
the improving Wi-Fi network efficiency and the providing user QoS/QoE.
Legacy IEEE 802.11 Distributed Coordinating
Function (DCF) has some lacks in these functionalities. These limitations are as followings in detail. First,
All stations (STAs)’ services have equal priority when
they access the media. Second, the media access control
of each STA is impossible. Third, an Access Point (AP)
and STA have same priority so that it makes a beacon
frame transmission delay. In the IEEE 802.11e standard,
the enhanced Distributed Channel Access (EDCA) uses
4 access categories (ACs) to solve the above problems as
shown in Figure 1. In addition, the OFDMA (Orthogonal
Frequency Division Multiple Access) based techniques,
which are currently being discussed in the IEEE 802 TG
(Technical Group), are as shown in Figure 25–9.

2.2 IoT Technology
Generally, wireless sensor network technology is a kind of
surveillance/control/communications technology, which
can support self-networking configuration & organization, and to collect information from some sensor nodes.
Nowadays, the ultimate goal of wireless sensor network
technology is evolving to Internet of Things (IoT) and
M2M (Machine to Machine). To achieve this goal, there
are some important elemental technologies, which are a
sensing, information processing and exchanging, intellectual network configuration, wireless sensor routing
technology and so on.
On the one hand, wireless sensor networks are based
on the non-IP communications, the common devices,
whereas, are based on the IP communications, which are
connected to the Internet. In the non-IP communications,
the devices can use various technologies for their communications, such as Bluetooth, ZigBee, RFID, Z-Wave
and etc. These typical non-IP base sensor nodes can
exchange the information to connect Internet through a
sink node. Due to the fact that the sensor nodes should
adopt some technologies to establish an Internet connection. For example, the sensor nodes can be applied

Indian Journal of Science and Technology

113

An Efficient Data Forwarding Scheme for Internet of Things in Wi-Fi Networks

Table 1.

Wi-Fi technology

Name

Features

IEEE 802.11ac

• Enhanced technology from IEEE 802.11n
• Bandwidth: 20MHz ~ 160MHz
• Maximum Throughput: 6.9Gbps (Theoretically)
• Using 8 spatial stream
• 256 QAM
• Multi-user MIMO
• Beamforming
• Etc.
• IEEE 802.11ad is a discrete technology
• Throughput: 6.8Gbps (Single Antenna, 64QAM without channel bonding)
• Maximum Throughput: 30Gbps (Theoretically)
• Frequency Band: 60GHz
• LOS (Line-Of-Sight) indispensability
• Etc.
• IEEE 802.11af is a Wi-Fi technology which is used in TV white space band
• Extended Hot Spot (broad service coverage)
• There are many applicable services
• It is one of the next generation Wi-Fi technology
• Etc.
• Established standard in 2010 for supporting the next generation ITS
• Bandwidth: 10MHz
• Throughput: 6 ~ 27Mbps
• Frequency Band: 5.850 ~ 5.925GHz
• Etc.

IEEE 802.11ad

IEEE 802.11af

IEEE 802.11p

Figure 1.

Priority based backoff algorithm in IEEE 802.11e.

6LoWPAN (IPv6 over Low power WPAN) technology, as
shown as Table 2, which is based on the IEEE 802.15.4
PHY/MAC10.

3. E
 fficient Data Forwarding
Scheme
Basically, IoT devices have same priority with other STA
when they should access the medium. Although the IoT
devices or sink node of the IoT devices have few transmis-

114

Vol 8 (S8) | April 2015 | www.indjst.org

sion data, and they don’t need high bandwidth, the devices
should contend for gaining a TXOP in the current Wi-Fi
networks. It is very inefficient situation in the Wi-Fi networks because most of the IoT devices have to save their
battery, and they usually need to make a periodic connection. Nonetheless, the current Wi-Fi standards haven’t
any considerations about that11–13.
To solve these problems, we propose an efficient data
forwarding scheme for IoT devices. Basically, the proposed scheme assign the differentiated access privilege to

Indian Journal of Science and Technology

Won-Shik Na and Seok-Hoon Kim

Figure 2.

Table 2.

UL Transmission scheme and OFDMA based UL transmission scheme.

Non-IP communication technology

Name

Features

ZigBee

•Wireless network technology for low transmission speed and short distance
communication
• Low power consumption and low cost
• Various and broad applicable scopes for intelligent home network, factory automation,
distribution, HCI, telematics, environment monitoring, etc.
• Consist of physical layer, MAC layer, network layer, and application layer
• IEEE 802.15.4 standard
• Supporting the routing and addressing scheme for tree topology and mesh topology
• Profile: ZigBee Home Automation Public Profile, ZigBee Smart Energy Profile
• RF4CE: Enhanced ZigBee specification (including remote control solution and network
stack)
• Supporting AES-128 in RF4CE
• Home automation wireless transmission technology, which is established by Z-Wave
Alliance
• Supporting the reliable communication between one or more nodes and control units
• Consist of physical layer, MAC layer, transport layer, routing layer and application layer
• Frequency Band: 869MHz/908MHz(Europe/America) and 2.4GHz
• Maximum Throughput: 9.6kbps, 40kbps, 200kbps (Theoretically)
• There are 2 types (Controller and Slave)
• Supporting the source routing base routing in the routing layer
• It is a technology to connect to the legacy IP networks with IPv6 in low power WPAN
• Based on IEEE 802.15.4 PHY/MAC
• It is possible to connect to a IP base network without gateway or intermediate device

Z-Wave

6Lo
WPAN

guarantee a TXOP of IoT device. It can be a kind of application of IEEE 802.11e standard.
The back-off process is determined by various parameters such as CWmin (minimum congestion window),
CWmax (maximum congestion window), AIFS (arbitration inter-frame space), and TXOPlimit, as shown as Figure
1. The CWmin is most important factor to affect all of the
stations in the Wi-Fi networks because Wi-Fi network,
which is based on the IEEE 802.11 standards, frequently

Vol 8 (S8) | April 2015 | www.indjst.org

encounter congestions, which are caused by contention.
However, if the IoT device has same parameter value
with other normal station (N-STA), the IoT device can’t
achieve their efficient data forwarding. That is, the device
can’t save their battery life time, because the device has
to keep the status as a wake when it has to transmit their
data. Therefore, the proposed EDFS assign the parameters
of IoT device (i-DEV) and N-STA including Access Point
(AP) to avoid the situations as follows:

Indian Journal of Science and Technology

115

An Efficient Data Forwarding Scheme for Internet of Things in Wi-Fi Networks

i = DEV {(CW ↓ min↑ (i − DEV)
= CW ↓ min↑ default RP 2
(w ↓ max/ w↓ (i − DEV ))@ CW ↓ max ↑ (i − DEV ) (1)
= CW ↓ max ↑ default RP 2(w ↓ max/ w↓
(i − DEV )),and @ AIFS ↓(i − DEV )
N − STA{(CW↓ min↑ (N − STA)
= CW↓ min↑ default 2↑ i @ CW↓ max ↑
(N − STA) = CW↓ max ↑ default 2↑ i, and
@ AIFS ↓ (N − STA) = DIFS) − 1
RP 2(k)

2[log 2 ( k )] k −2 [log 2 (k) ≤2 [log 2 (k)]− k
2 [log 2 (k), otherwise

{

,





(2)

(3)

where wmax represents the highest weight in the Wi-Fi network, wi-DEV is a weight for the i-DEV and AP, and RP2(k)
is the integer power of 2 closest to k.
The proposed EDFS assign higher weight tothe i-DEV
than the N-STA, as shown in equations (1), (2), and (3).
Based on these equations, AP and i-DEV can be acquired
high priority than N-STA. It means that the i-DEV has a
shorter back-off time, and then the device can keep high
medium access privileges than N-STA based on the short
back-off time. Therefore, the i-DEV can retain much more
TXOP than N-STA based on the scheme in the proposed
EDFS, because the i-DEV has more media access privileges with short back-off times. However, it isn’t enough
to save the battery and to guarantee the IoT devices’ data
transmissions, because the IoT device doesn’t need high
bandwidth than N-STA. Although the EDFS assign the
high priority to an IoT device when the device wants to
transmit their data, it doesn’t need to keep the status all the
time because the IoT data transmission will be periodically occurred. So, we adjust admission control functions
to solve this problem in the EDFS. The admission control
part in the EDFS handles the admission of i-DEV and
N-STA to improve the entire Wi-Fi network throughput
and the efficient data transmission of IoT devices. The
admission control part of EDFS manages admission processes by using each stations local variables, which are
admitted_time and used_time. It is almost similar to the
IEEE 802.11 EDCA contention-based admission control
usages. However, the IoT devices will send a specific traffic specification (TSPEC) to AP, when they have to send
the TSPEC. Basically, all stations send a QoS request
frame to AP, when they negotiate the traffic stream (TS).

116

Vol 8 (S8) | April 2015 | www.indjst.org

In the QoS request frame, there are many values such as
the TSPEC of mean data rate, delay bound, minimum
PHY rate and so on. On the other hand, it is added the
periodic value of IoT device in the EDFS. Based on the
periodic value, the EDFS control the admission processes
of IoT device. As a result, the EDFS can keep the high
weight status for a while.
Since the AP receives the QoS request frame of IoT
device, it distinguishes the QoS request frame is the corresponding TS of IoT device or not. And then, the AP
determines that the request will be accepted or not. The
AP calculates a medium_time if it is accepted. The calculated medium_time is as follows, and then the value will
send to the each station,
mediumtime

mediumtime i −DEV = mediumtime i ×wi −DEV

{

mediumtime N −STA = mediumtimei



(4)

where, wi-DEV means the weight of the IoT device,
and the medium_timei-DEV value is 0 <medium_timei-DEV>
requested time of the IoT device. The later process is same
as the IEEE 802.11 EDCA admission control part.
We have implemented a network topology by using
the NS-2 to verify the EDFS performance. There are 4
stations, one is a sink node of IoT devices, the other are
normal stations in the simulation networks. The normal
stations are configured to generate streaming traffic for 1
hour, the sink node of IoT devices is configured to generate the data transmission periodically in every 5 minutes.
On the one hand, we set the weight (wi-DEV) of sink node
data transmission to 5.
Figure 3 shows delay comparison results of the i-DEV
and N-STAs. The average delay of i-DEV is 241.38ms, and
the N-STAs’ average delay are 496ms, 501ms, and 492ms,
respectively. Based on these results, we are proven that the
proposed EDFS can provide acceptable delay to the IoT
devices. The bandwidth of IoT device isn’t an important
matter, because the IoT device doesn’t need high bandwidth. Therefore, the proposed EDFS could be improved
the overall Wi-Fi network throughput, including the IoT
devices and sink nodes.

4. Conclusion
The proposed EDFS can be a kind of QoS scheme, because
it could assign various weight or priority to each station
in the Wi-Fi networks. In addition, the EDFS has a consideration of IoT device and sink node. However, normal
stations and IoT devices have a different traffic attribute

Indian Journal of Science and Technology

Won-Shik Na and Seok-Hoon Kim

Figure 3.

Delay comparison of i-DEV and N-STAs.

such as bandwidth, delay, jitter and so on. Due to the fact
that the legacy Wi-Fi networks can’t support an efficient
data transmission of the IoT devices until now. So, we propose the EDFS to solve these problems. The EDFS assign
the various weight to the IoT device so that the traffic
attributes of devices are applied to the transmissions when
they need to transmit their data. Nevertheless, the EDFS
can’t assign dynamic weights to each station yet. It can be
a very important thing, because the IoT technology and
device will be certainly deployed in the near future, and
there are various types of the devices. So, it will be one of
our future researches.

5. Acknowledgement

6.

7.

8.

9.

Funding for this paper was provided by Namseoul
University.

6. References
1. Yang SH, Song JT. Intelligent terabit network technology for
implementing giga korea. TTA Journal. 2013; 146:26–31.
2. Jung ChH. Evolution of Wi-Fi Application Services. TTA
Journal. 2013; 147:33–8.
3. ONF white paper. Software-Defined Networking: The New
Norm for Networks; 2012.
4. Cisco. Cisco Visual networking Index: Global Mobile Data
Traffic Forecast Update; 2013.
5. IEEE. IEEE Standard for Information technology Telecommunications and information exchange between
systems Local and metropolitan area network – Specific

Vol 8 (S8) | April 2015 | www.indjst.org

10.

11.

12.

13.

requirements - Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access
Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications.
IEEE Std 802.11-2012; 2012.
Yu X, Navaratnam P, Moessner K. Resource Reservation
Schemes for IEEE 802.11-Based Wireless Networks: A
Survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials. 2013;
15(3)1042–61.
Kim H, Shin KG. Admission and eviction control of cognitive radio users at Wi-Fi 2.0 hotspots. IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing. 2012; 11(11):1666–77.
Hegde M, Kumar P, Vasudev KR, Sowmya NN, Anand SVR,
Kumar A, Kuri J. Experiences With a centralized scheduling approach for performance management of IEEE 802.11
wireless LANs. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking.
2013; 21(2):648–62.
Lagkas. TD, Papadimitriou. GI, and Nicopolitidis P. Priorityoriented adaptive control with QoS guarantee for wireless
LANs. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology. 2007
Jul; 56(4);1761–72.
Korea Communications Agency. Wireless Sensor Networks
base Communications Technology for Internet of Things.
Broadcasting & Communications Technology Issue and
Forecast. 2014; 37:2–12.
Branchs A, Azcorra A, Garcia C, Cuevas R. Applications
and challenges of the 802.11e EDCA mechanism: an experimental study. IEEE Networks. 2005; 19(4):52–8.
Ni Q. Performance analysis and enhancements for
IEEE 802.11e wireless networks. IEEE Networks. 2005;
19(4):21–7.
Kim S, Na W. QoS Guaranteeing scheme based on differential access privileges in hybrid Wi-Fi hotspots. Journal
of Next Generation Information Technology. 2013;
4(8):284–91.

Indian Journal of Science and Technology

117

