This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

1
Dynamic Network Slicing for Multitenant Heterogeneous Cloud Radio Access Networks
Ying Loong Lee, Member, IEEE, Jonathan Loo, Teong Chee Chuah, and Li-Chun Wang, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Multitenant cellular network slicing has been gaining huge interest recently. However, it is not well-explored under the heterogeneous cloud radio access network (H-CRAN) architecture. This paper proposes a dynamic network slicing scheme for multitenant H-CRANs, which takes into account tenants’ priority, baseband resources, fronthaul and backhaul capacities, quality of service (QoS) and interference. The framework of the network slicing scheme consists of an upper-level, which manages admission control, user association and baseband resource allocation; and a lower-level, which performs radio resource allocation among users. Simulation results show that the proposed scheme can achieve a higher network throughput, fairness and QoS performance compared to several baseline schemes.
Index Terms—Multitenancy, H-CRAN, network slicing, resource management
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE demand for broadband multimedia applications has been rising exponentially, leading to a dramatic increase in network capital and operating expenditures. Network sharing has been introduced as a promising solution to the problem by allowing multiple operators to share the network infrastructure and resources [2]. For 5G systems, network virtualization emerges as the key enabling technology of network sharing [3]–[6]. It allows network sharing to be performed in the form of multitenancy, whereby multiple virtual networks can be created on physical network hardware, each being known as a network slice. The owner of each network slice is known as the tenant or virtual network operator (VNO) [7]. The advantage of network slicing is its ﬂexibility to meet different quality of service (QoS) requirements of multiple VNOs, which is one of the key design goals of 5G networks [6]. Also, network slicing allows infrastructure providers to provide “NetworkSlice-as-a-Service” [8]–[10] to service providers, speciﬁcally those who do not own physical network infrastructures or those with insufﬁcient network coverage. There are two types of network slicing: core and radio access network slicing [10].
This work was supported in part by the Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia under FRGS grant MMUE/140082 and TM Research & Development under Grant MMUE/160065. A preliminary version of this work appeared in the proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in Electrical, Electronic and Systems Engineering, Putrajaya, Malaysia, Nov. 2016 [1].
Y. L. Lee and T. C. Chuah are with the Faculty of Engineering, Multimedia University, 63100 Cyberjaya, Malaysia (e-mail: yingloonglee@gmail.com; tcchuah@mmu.edu.my).
J. Loo is with the School of Computing and Engineering, University of West London, Ealing W5 5RF, UK (e-mail: jonathan.loo@uwl.ac.uk).
L.-C. Wang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: lichun@g2.nctu.edu.tw).

In this paper, we focus on the latter where baseband resources, base stations (BSs), radio resources, and transmission power are shared among the tenants to serve their associated users.
The studies in [7], [11]–[21] have investigated network sharing and slicing based on traditional cellular architectures where baseband processing is decentralized to BSs. However, this architecture is energy- and cost-inefﬁcient [22]. Thus, cloud radio access networks (C-RANs) [22] have emerged as a new architecture which centralizes baseband resources to a single baseband unit (BBU) pool that connects to several radio transceiver units, known as remote radio heads (RRHs), via optical fronthaul links. The fact that BBU pools can be virtualized at cloud data centers facilitates network slicing implementation in C-RANs. Researchers have begun to explore network slicing in multitenant C-RANs [1], [23], [24].
Heterogeneous cellular networks, which consist of macrocells overlaid with small-cells, have been intensively studied due to their potential for extending network coverage and improving capacity [25]–[27]. Multitenancy has also been studied under this architecture in [28]. Combining multitenancy with C-RAN is considered in [29], resulting in the heterogeneous C-RAN (H-CRAN) architecture, where both their advantages are inherited. In [1], we have investigated network slicing for multitenant H-CRANs. However, the study only focused on the small-cell tier. In this paper, we extend the network slicing framework for multitenant H-CRANs to both small-cell and macrocell tiers.
The objective of this study is to develop a dynamic network slicing scheme for downlink multitenant H-CRANs. The contributions of this study are summarized as follows:
1) A network slicing model for multitenant H-CRANs is introduced. Here, network slicing is performed as a process of allocating network resources to users associated with different tenants, where each admitted user receives a set of resources (i.e., associated RRH and BBU with certain capacity, subchannels and transmission power levels).
2) A network slicing problem is formulated to maximize the weighted network throughput of the multitenant HCRAN, subject to the interference, QoS, fronthaul and backhaul capacity, and BBU pool capacity constraints.
3) A two-level dynamic resource management framework is proposed with the upper-level managing user admission, user association and BBU capacity allocation, and the lower-level managing radio resource allocation.
4) For the upper-level, the admission control problem is solved by a dynamic programming approach whose complexity can be tuned; the user association problem

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

2

TABLE I LIST OF NOTATION

Notation N K S
bsu
ps ku wu CcBUP Rmax, u Γs k u
B
Cfh Cxh, s
Pmax, s
Ua g¯s u
ΓLsBk u
ηsLBk u

Description Set of tenants: {1, . . . , | N | } Set of PRBs: {1, . . . , | K | } Set of RRHs: {0, 1, . . . , | S | } where s = 0 indicates the M-RRH
bs u = 1 if UE u associates with RRH s; else bs u = 0
The power of RRH s on PRB k for UE u Priority weight of UE u BBU pool capacity Required maximum data rate of UE u SINR experienced by UE u from RRH s on PRB k
Bandwidth of a PRB (i.e., 180 kHz)
Fronthaul capacity Cxh, s = Cbh if s = 0; else Cxh, s = Cfh
Maximum allowable transmission power of RRH s
Set of UEs admitted to the network Wideband channel gain between UE u and RRH s Lower bound SINR experienced by UE u from RRH s on PRB k Lower bound spectral efﬁciency achieved by UE u associated with RRH s on PRB k

Notation U Un au
ωs k u
vn cvB, u Rmin, u gs ku PAWGN
Imax, s k u
Cbh Wu
rs k u
URRH, s Γwb, s u rsLkBu

Description
Set of UEs: {1, . . . , | U | } Set of UEs belonging to tenant n au = 1 if UE u is admitted to the network; else au = 0 ωs k u = 1 if PRB k is allocated to UE u that is associated with RRH s, else ωs k u = 0 Priority weight of tenant n Virtual BBU capacity of UE u Required minimum data rate of UE u Channel gain of PRB k between UE u and RRH s AWGN power Interference threshold of PRB k for UE u associated with RRH s Backhaul capacity Wu = vn wu if u ∈ Un; else Wu = 0 Capacity achieved by UE u associated with RRH s on PRB k Set of admitted UEs that are associated with RRH s Wideband SINR experienced by UE u from RRH s Lower bound capacity achieved by UE u associated with RRH s on PRB k

is solved using a suboptimal low-complexity greedy algorithm; the BBU capacity allocation problem is solved by linear programming. 5) For the lower-level, the resource allocation problem is formulated as a nonconvex mixed-integer programming problem and solved by the Lagrangian dual method.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II reviews the related studies. Section III presents the system model of a multitenant H-CRAN and formulates the network slicing problem. Section IV presents the proposed network slicing scheme and proposes algorithms for implementation. Section V compares the performance of the proposed scheme with several baseline schemes. Concluding remarks are made in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
Several studies have investigated network slicing and sharing for multitenant cellular networks [1], [7], [8], [11]–[21], [23], [24], [28]. In [8], the impact of network slicing to radio access networks in terms of resource utilization, tenants’ protection, trafﬁc differentiation, etc was discussed. In [11], resource allocation among tenants was studied using an auction game where tenants sequentially compete for network resources. In [12], an entity named hypervisor was introduced to manage network slicing among tenants using virtualization technology. In [13], a network virtualization substrate was proposed, which runs a slice scheduler that allocates radio resources to the tenants, and a ﬂow scheduler that schedules data transmission for the users in each network slice. The authors in [14] suggested to reserve radio resources for each tenant and to admit users based on resource availability of the associated network slice. Physical and virtual resource sharing for multitenant cellular networks were compared in [15]. In [7], the authors proposed to associate users with the best cell sector in order to balance the loads among network slices and cell sectors. A resource sharing scheme was proposed

in [16] to pool and share the radio resources of all network slices among tenants. In [17], resources are assigned to each tenant as per the service-level agreement (SLA) and resource allocation among tenants is performed based on throughput maximization with some degree of fairness. The authors in [18] proposed to assign minimum amounts of radio resources as per the SLA among tenants while device-to-device users and cellular users can share radio resources if they belong to the same tenant. In [19], a heuristic-based admission control and resource allocation scheme was proposed to perform network slicing according to the priority of the tenants. A resource sharing scheme based on software-deﬁned networking was designed in [20] to share network resources among operators under scenarios with multiple radio access technologies (e.g., cellular, WiFi). In [21], the authors devised a fair resource slicing scheme for multitenant networks through game formulation based on the α-fairness utility. A resource negotiation scheme was introduced in [28] for multitenant heterogeneous cellular networks to allow BSs with insufﬁcient radio resources to access the spare resources of their neighboring BSs. In [23], a virtualized multitenant C-RAN architecture was designed to perform capacity allocation among tenants as per the SLA. The authors in [24] suggested an auction approach for network slicing in C-RANs where computational, storage and radio resources are competed for. In [1], a network slicing scheme for multitenant H-CRANs was proposed as a process of assigning BBU capacity, RRHs and radio resources to the users.
Despite the numerous related studies carried out such as [7], [11]–[21], they only focused on traditional cellular architectures which are less energy- and cost-efﬁcient compared to the C-RAN architecture [22]. Although the studies in [1], [23] and [24] considered the C-RAN architecture, the work in [23] and [24] have not jointly considered the fronthaul capacity constraints and baseband resource allocation in the BBU pool whereas the study in [1] only considered network slicing in the small-cell tier. Moreover, most of the related studies in [7],

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

3

[11]–[14], [16]–[18], [28] do not consider the diverse multiuser channel quality in the network slicing process for achieving different throughput-fairness tradeoffs in multitenant networks. Therefore, the current work aims to ﬁll the aforementioned gaps by extending the work of [1].
III. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
A Long Term Evolution (LTE)-based multitenant H-CRAN model consisting of a macrocell and several small-cells is considered in this study. In this model, we assume that each tenant has its own core network (or core network slice) that connects to the H-CRAN. The macrocell RRH (M-RRH) and the small-cell RRHs (S-RRHs) are connected to a cloud BBU pool via the backhaul and fronthaul links, respectively. Also, C/U splitting is assumed in the system model, whereby the control and data planes are separated such that the control plane is managed by the M-RRH in the network [29]. We follow the LTE speciﬁcations in which the channel bandwidth is divided into physical resource blocks (PRBs) with each occupying 180 kHz in the frequency domain and 0.5 ms in the time domain [30]. In LTE, a minimum of two PRBs (in the time domain) can be allocated to a UE as resource allocation is performed every transmission time interval (TTI) of 1 ms. Hereafter, we assume that 1) each PRB experiences ﬂat and slow fading; 2) the network is perfectly synchronized; and 3) shared spectrum mode, whereby both M-RRH and SRRHs can access the entire channel bandwidth, is adopted. For system modeling, we employ a set of notation as given in Table I. It is noteworthy that U = n∈N Un and n∈N Un = ∅.
In this study, we assume that the BBUs are virtualized in the BBU pool and adopt the BBU model in [31] where each virtual BBU associates with one UE and has a certain amount of computational capacity quantiﬁed in the form of user data rate. This model has also been considered in [32] and [33] for resource allocation in C-RANs where the computational capacity1 of the virtual BBU is modeled as the service rate of a processing queue by abstracting the baseband data processing of the BBU. Here, we denote the computational capacity of a virtual BBU required by each UE u as cvB,u. We treat the computational capacity of a virtual BBU as its supported maximum user data rate and thus the capacity allocation depends on the QoS requirements of the trafﬁc services provided by the UE’s associated tenant. We also assume that the amount of computational resources of the BBU pool is limited by the user data capacity, CcBUP.
Since tenants may impose different priorities over the network due to the nature of their provisioned services, we
1The computational capacity here is not equivalent to the computational burden, where the latter refers to the amount of time complexity required by the virtual BBU to run a baseband process within a time interval. Since the computational burden of a virtual BBU depends on the number of PRBs and MCS allocated to the user, we assume that the peak computational burden allowable for a virtual BBU is scaled such that the virtual BBU can support the desired computational capacity considering that the associated user is allocated maximum number of PRBs and the highest order MCS during virtual BBU capacity allocation. In this case, the virtual BBU can still support the desired computational capacity regardless of the number of PRBs and MCS allocated to the associated user. Such scaling can be achieved by modifying the speciﬁcations of the virtual BBU, e.g., the number of processor cores, core clock speed and memory capacity.

characterize the priority of each tenant n by vn ∈ [0, 1] as in [19], where n∈N vn = 1. Also, we characterize the priority of UE u by wu ∈ [0, 1] to achieve various notions of fairness. Each UE is imposed with a set of QoS requirements

depending on the type of services provided by the associated

tenant. Here, we model the QoS requirements of each UE u

with minimum and maximum data rates, Rmin,u and Rmax,u, respectively [19]. The minimum data rate requirement is

compliant with LTE and it is deﬁned as the guaranteed bit

rate (GBR) for inelastic trafﬁc [34], [35]. Nonetheless, the

minimum QoS model is still applicable to elastic trafﬁc such

as best-effort by imposing zero minimum data rate. On the

other hand, the maximum data rate requirement corresponds

to the maximum bit rate (MBR) and aggregate-MBR (AMBR)

deﬁned in LTE to achieve congestion control for inelastic and

elastic trafﬁc, respectively [34], [35]. Besides that, maximum

QoS requirements have been used in [36] to limit interference

by reducing the number of PRBs allocated to UEs. It is noted

that the virtual BBU capacity of each UE u, cvB,u needs to meet its minimum data rate requirement for QoS satisfaction.

For channel modeling, the signal-to-interference-plus-noise

ratio (SINR) experienced by UE u at RRH s on PRB k is

modeled as [1], [36]

Γsku =

i ∈ S\ {s }

psk u gsk u

, (1)

j ∈U\{u } aj bij ωik j pik j giku + PAWGN

where gsku is the channel gain experienced by UE u at RRH s on PRB k, and PAWGN is the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) power. Next, the achievable upper bound capacity of

UE u at RRH s on PRB k can be calculated as

rsku = B log2(1 + Γsku),

(2)

where B is the bandwidth of a PRB. It is noteworthy that

the actual capacity of each UE depends on the modulation

and coding scheme (MCS) selected in LTE systems, where

the throughput can be calculated as a trunked version of (2).

For simplicity, we consider (2) in the problem and solution

formulation as well as performance evaluation where the throughput results obtained are upper bound capacity values.

To suppress cross-tier and cotier interference, the threshold

Imax,sku is introduced, which is the maximum allowable interference experienced by UE u associated with RRH s on

PRB k. Each RRH has a maximum transmission power level,
Pmax,s. Also, each S-RRH (i.e., s 0) is connected to the BBU pool via a fronthaul link with user data capacity Cfh whereas the M-RRH is connected to the cloud BBU pool via a backhaul link with user data capacity Cbh2. For notational simplicity, we denote

Cxh,s = CCfbhh

s=0 s0

(3)

2The practical capacity of an optical backhaul or fronthaul link could be up to several Gb/s, which is much higher than the user data rate, because the user data is encapsulated by the common public radio interface (CPRI) protocol, which transforms the user data into a very high-frequency waveform. For instance, a single-sector LTE network with 20 MHz bandwidth and 2 × 2 MIMO conﬁguration, which can achieve up to 150 Mb/s downlink user data rate, would require a CPRI rate of 2457.6 Mb/s with 10/8 coding and 15+1 IQ sample width [22], [37]. For more information about CPRI, backhaul and fronthaul, readers may refer to [38] and [39]. In this paper, we refer both the backhaul and fronthaul capacity to as their user data capacity.

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

4

In this paper, network slicing of multitenant H-CRANs can be treated as a resource allocation process that involves 1) virtual BBU capacity allocation; 2) UE admission and association; and 3) PRB and power allocation. First of all, let

Wu = 0vnwu

u ∈ Un u Un.

(4)

Then, a generic network slicing problem for multitenant H-

CRANs can be formulated as

max

Wu au bsuωskursku (5)

au,bsu,cvB, u,ωsku, psku s ∈S k ∈K u ∈U

subject to

au

bsuωskursku ≥ au Rmin,u ∀u ∈ U

s∈S k∈K

au

bsuωskursku ≤ aucvB,u ∀u ∈ U

s∈S k∈K

au

bsuωskursku ≤ au Rmax,u ∀u ∈ U

s∈S k∈K

au bsuωsku psku ≤ Pmax,s ∀s ∈ S
k∈K u∈U

au bsuωskursku ≤ Cxh,s ∀s ∈ S
k∈K u∈U

aj bij ωik j pik j giku ≤ Imax,sku
i∈S\{s} j ∈U\{u}

∀s ∈ S, k ∈ K , k ∈ U

(5a) (5b) (5c) (5d) (5e)
(5f)

au Rmin,u ≤ aucvB,u ≤ au Rmax,u ∀u ∈ U

(5g)

aucvB,u ≤ CcBUP
u∈U

(5h)

au bsu ≤ 1 ∀u ∈ U

(5i)

s∈S

au bsuωsku ≤ 1 ∀s ∈ S, k ∈ K

(5j)

u∈U

au, bsu, ωsku ∈ {0, 1} ∀s ∈ S, k ∈ K , u ∈ U (5k)

cvB,u, psku ≥ 0 ∀s ∈ S, k ∈ K , u ∈ U.

(5l)

Constraint (5a) ensures that each admitted UE is guaranteed a minimum data rate. The UE data rate is bounded by its associated virtual BBU capacity and the maximum data rate in constraints (5b) and (5c) respectively. The total transmission power of each RRH is limited in constraint (5d). Constraint (5e) implies that the total UE data rate carried over the backhaul or fronthaul link is bounded by its capacity. Constraint (5f) limits the interference experienced by each UE u associated with RRH s on each PRB k. Constraint (5g) ensures that the virtual BBU capacity of each UE is allocated an amount between its required minimum and maximum data rates. Constraint (5h) guarantees that the sum capacity of all virtual BBUs does not exceed the BBU pool capacity. Constraint (5i) permits each UE to associate with only one RRH. Each PRB will not be allocated to two or more UEs associating with the same RRH, as enforced by constraint (5j). Constraint (5k) ensures binary-valued au, bsu and ωsku. Constraint (5l) ensures nonnegative psku and cvB,u.
Let Ru be the achievable instantaneous rate of UE u and R¯u be the past average rate achieved by UE u estimated with

an exponentially weighted low-pass time window. It has been shown in [40] and [41] that if the time window length is sufﬁciently large or the time-averaging step size is sufﬁciently small, a network utility maximization (NUM) problem which maximizes the total utility with respect to R¯u is equivalent to a weighted sum rate maximization problem with respect to Ru where the weight corresponding to UE u is the gradient of the utility with respect to R¯u. Clearly, (5) is one such gradientbased weighted sum rate maximization problem with Wu being the gradient of the utility with respect to the average rates. Thus, the gradient-based framework of (5) has the following implications [40]:
1) The gradient-based framework provides better ﬂexibility to enhance spectral efﬁciency due to the time window used for averaging R¯u where the length of which relaxes the fairness requirement, unlike the classical NUM problem that maximizes the total utility with respect to Ru which requires achieving fairness at each time epoch;
2) The gradient-based framework reduces computational complexity because the gradient of the utility relies only on previous resource allocation (e.g., past average rate);
3) The linear objective function of the weighted sum rate maximization problem in (5) can simplify the solution algorithm and achieves faster convergence;
4) It has been shown that improvements of actual average user rate can be achieved.
As such, various notions of fairness with respect to R¯u can be achieved by equating Wu of (5) with the gradient of a generic fairness utility. One such utility is the weighted α-fairness function [42], [43] where α ≥ 0 is a fairness parameter. This leads to the following proposition.
Proposition 1: The solution to (5) is weighted α-fair with respect to R¯u when wu = 1/R¯uα.
Proof: Refer to Appendix A. It is noteworthy that adoption of the weighted α-fairness function as the utility for the gradient-based framework of (5) as in Proposition 1 achieves fairness with respect to the longterm average rates. This is different from the classical NUM problem that maximizes the same fairness utility but with respect to the instantaneous rates. Nevertheless, the gradientbased framework is more preferred when long-term average rates are concerned, and thus is considered in this study.
To solve (5), we analyze the complexity of the problem and obtain the following:
Proposition 2: The problem in (5) is generally NP-hard. Proof: Refer to Appendix B.
As such, (5) is computationally intractable. Moreover, solving this problem directly is impractical because rapid channel variations would trigger a rapidly repeated network slicing process, which would burden higher-level functions of the network and results in increased signaling overhead. Thus, we propose a two-level hierarchical approach to the problem in the next section.
IV. PROPOSED NETWORK SLICING SCHEME
In this section, we propose an efﬁcient two-level network slicing framework for a multitenant H-CRAN (cf. Fig. 1).

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications
5

Fig. 1. Proposed network slicing framework.

A. Upper-Level
In this level, differentiated prioritization among UEs is performed. Firstly, admission control is performed to admit high-priority UEs while considering their QoS requirements and the availability of the BBU pool capacity. Then, the admitted UEs are associated, according to their priority, with the RRHs that provide them with high channel quality, subject to availability of fronthaul and backhaul capacity. Next, a virtual BBU is created for each admitted UE with a capacity that meets QoS requirements.
1) Admission Control: Here, we intend to maximize the number of UEs admitted to the network, which corresponds to maximizing the network throughput while considering their priority. Clearly, the number of admitted UEs can be increased if cvB,u is smaller. Since cvB,u ≥ Rmin,u, we can formulate the following admission control problem:

max Wu au

(6)

au

u∈U

subject to

au Rmin,u ≤ RcBUP

(6a)

u∈U

au ∈ {0, 1} ∀u ∈ U

(6b)

where constraint (6a) is derived from constraint (5h) to ensure that the total minimum data rate of all admitted UEs does not exceed the BBU pool capacity.
Proposition 3: The admission control problem in (6) can be classiﬁed as an NP-complete 0-1 knapsack problem [44].
Proof: Refer to Appendix C. Dynamic programming has been widely used to obtain the optimal solution for 0-1 knapsack problems. The key idea of dynamic programming is to decompose (6) into small problems and recursively calculate their objective function value based on the solutions for the even smaller problems [45]. The maximum objective function value can then be obtained

Algorithm 1 Dynamic programming-based UE admission

control algorithm

1: Set Nw, and set V (u, i) = X (u, i) = 0 and V (0, i) = 0 for all

u ∈ U and i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Nw}.

2: 3:

Calculate d = for all u ∈ U

CcBUP Nw

,

set

au

do

= 0 for all u

∈

U

and set Ntmp

=

Nw.

4: for all i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Nw} do

5:

if Rmin,u ≤ id and V (u − 1, i) < Wu + V

u − 1, i −

Rmin, u d

then

6:

Calculate V (u, i) = Wu + V

u − 1, i −

Rmin, u d

7:

Set X (u, i) = 1.

8:

else

9:

Set V (u, i) = V (u − 1, i).

10:

end if

11: end for

12: end for

13: Set u = |U |.

14: while u > 1 do

15: if X (u, Ntmp) = 1 then

16:

Set au = 1.

17:

Calculate Ntmp = Ntmp −

Rmin, u d

.

18:

u = u − 1.

19: end if

20: end while

by bottom-up computation using a table structure; the solution for the original problem can be therein obtained. Here, we design an admission control algorithm (cf. Algorithm 1) based on a dynamic programming approach in [46, pp. 266-272]. In steps 1-2 of Algorithm 1, we ﬁrst set a number Nw to produce a set of discrete integer values, i.e., {0, 1, 2, . . . , Nw}, which corresponds to a set of BBU pool capacities {0, d, 2d, . . . , Nwd} where Nwd = CcBUP. Further, V (u, i) is deﬁned to store the maximum value of (6) for any subset of {1, 2, . . . , u} with the capacity being at most id. Besides that, X (u, i) is deﬁned to trace the solution obtained from solving the problem in (6). Both V (u, i) and X (u, i) are set to zero for all u ∈ U

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

6

and i ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , Nw} initially. In addition, V (0, i) = 0 for

all i ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , Nw} is set to provide the value of (6)

35

corresponding to the fact that no UEs are admitted. Also,

34

au = 0 is set for all u ∈ U, and Ntmp = Nw is initialized.

33

Next, in steps 3-12, the solution is obtained by computing

V (u, i), which can be obtained as follows:

32

Lemma 1: For u ∈ U and i ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . . , Nw}, V (u, i) can

31

be calculated as

30

Number of Admitted UEs

V

(u,

i)

=

Vm(aux−V1+,(iVu)

− 1, i), Wu u − 1, i −

Rmin,u d

if Rmin,u ≤ id
otherwise, (7)

Proof: Refer to Appendix D.

While computing V (u, i), X (u, i) is set to one if UE u is

admitted and zero otherwise. Subsequently, in steps 13 - 20,

the solution au is obtained based on X (u, i).

The asymptotic computational complexity of Algorithm 1

can be shown to be of O(|U | Nw), which implies that the algorithm has a pseudo-polynomial time complexity due to Nw that is deﬁned for (6). Conventionally, by setting Nw = CcBUP, i.e., d = 1, the solution obtained using Algorithm 1 is

optimal for (6) by deﬁnition of (6) and Lemma 1. In this

case, the introduction of parameter d is redundant. However,

CcBUP could be too large as it would incur a prohibitively high computational complexity and the set of capacities for

Algorithm 1 becomes very large, which requires large memory

to store the objective function values. Notwithstanding that,

our algorithm provides the option to reduce computational

complexity and memory size. By setting Nw << CcBUP, i.e., d >> 1, the complexity and memory size can be reduced, but

possibly at the cost of solution optimality. Fig. 2 illustrates the

performance tradeoff of Algorithm 1 with different Nw for a particular scenario. Interestingly, certain values of Nw can still lead to optimal solutions. In fact, those values correspond to a

set of d, which are the factors of Rmin,u. As such, the general rule of thumb for Algorithm 1 to be optimal is to select a

value of Nw such that d is a factor of min{Rmin,u }u∈U . As such, Algorithm 1 can still optimally solve (6) with reasonable

complexity.

2) UE Association: After solving UE admission, the re-

jected UEs will be omitted from the network slicing process.

Next, we proceed to solve the UE association problem with

the objective to associate admitted UEs with RRHs that could

provide high channel quality with consideration of the UE’s

priority. Firstly, the wideband SINR received by each admitted

UE is estimated as follows:

Γwb,su =

Pmax, s g¯su

,

i ∈S\{s } Pmax,i g¯iu + PAWGN

(8)

where Γwb,su and g¯su are the wideband SINR and average gain across the channel bandwidth between RRH s and UE u, respectively. Next, we can formulate the UE association problem as

max

bsuWu Γwb,su

(9)

bsu s ∈S u ∈Ua

29
28
27
26
25 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 N
w
Fig. 2. Performance tradeoff of Algorithm 1 for the following particular scenario: two equal-priority tenants with each having 20 UEs, CcBUP = 3000, Rmin, u = 30 for all UEs, and all UE have equal priority.

subject to

bsu Rmin,u ≤ Cxh,s ∀s ∈ S

(9a)

u ∈Ua

bsu = 1 ∀u ∈ Ua

(9b)

s∈S

bsu ∈ {0, 1} ∀s ∈ S, u ∈ Ua,

(9c)

where Ua = {u ∈ U |au = 1} is the set of UEs admitted to the network. Constraint (9a) is derived from (5e) to ensure that the fronthaul (or backhaul) link can at least carry the minimum data rate required by the associated UEs, whereas (9b) is derived from (5i) to guarantee that each admitted UE associates with only one RRH.
Proposition 4: The problem in (9) can be classiﬁed as an NP-complete 0-1 multiple knapsack problem [44].
Proof: Refer to Appendix E.
For 0-1 multiple knapsack problems, dynamic programming techniques are inefﬁcient as the computational complexity would be prohibitively much larger than solving a 0-1 knapsack problem. Therefore we propose a greedy algorithm for (9) to ﬁnd a feasible suboptimal solution (cf. Algorithm 2). The key idea of Algorithm 2 is to associate the UE with the RRH that provides the highest weighted wideband SINR if the fronthaul (or backhaul) link of the S-RRH (or M-RRH) still has sufﬁcient capacity to accommodate the UE. Firstly, the weighted wideband SINR of each UE is calculated for all s ∈ S. Then, the RRH that provides the highest weighted wideband SINR value to the UE will be selected to evaluate (9a). If (9a) holds, the UE will associate with the RRH. Otherwise, the RRH that provides the next highest weighted wideband SINR to the UE will be selected and the same process is repeated. The asymptotic computational complexity of Algorithm 2 is of O(|S||U |).
3) Virtual BBU Capacity Allocation: After UE association, the BBU capacity is allocated to each admitted UEs. Here,

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

7

Algorithm 2 Greedy UE Association Algorithm

1: Set Srem = S, and set Crem,s = Cxh,s , f s = 0 and bsu = 0 for all s ∈ S and u ∈ Ua.

2: for all u ∈ Ua do 3: for all s ∈ S do

4:

Calculate f s = Wu Γwb,su .

5: end for

6: Find s = arg maxi∈Srem fi. 7: while Crem,s ≥ Rmin,s do

8:

if Crem,s ≥ Rmin,s then

9:

Set bsu = 1 and update Crem,s = Crem,s − Rmin,s .

10:

else

11:

Srem = Srem\{s}.

12:

end if

13: end while

14: end for

the following virtual BBU capacity allocation problem is

introduced:

max

Wu cvB,u

cvB, u u ∈Ua

(10)

subject to

cvB,u ≤ Cxh,s
u ∈URRH, s
Rmin,u ≤ cvB,u ≤ Rmax,u

∀s ∈ S ∀u ∈ Ua

cvB,u ≤ CcBUP
u ∈Ua
cvB,u ≥ 0 ∀u ∈ Ua,

(10a) (10b) (10c) (10d)

where (10a) and (10b) are derived from (5e) and (5g), respectively, and (10c) is equivalent to (5h). The objective of (10) is to maximize the virtual BBU capacity assigned to each UE with consideration of the UE’s priority, fronthaul and backhaul capacities, and BBU pool capacity. Apparently, this problem can be expressed as a linear programming problem, which can be solved by the well-known simplex method [45].

∀u ∈ URRH,s, s ∈ S, k ∈ K
ωsku ≤ 1 ∀s ∈ S, k ∈ K
u ∈URRH, s
ωsku ∈ {0, 1} ∀s ∈ S, k ∈ K , u ∈ URRH,s psku ≥ 0 ∀s ∈ S, k ∈ K , u ∈ URRH,s,

(11d) (11e)
(11f) (11g)

where URRH,s = {u ∈ U |au = 1, bsu = 1} is the set of admitted UEs associated with RRH s. The main objective of (11) is to allocate sufﬁcient PRBs and power to the UEs such that their minimum data rate can be achieved by fully exploiting multiuser diversity of the channel. Although (11) is less complicated than (5), it is still generally NP-hard. Therefore, we simplify the problem into a tractable one and solve it using a conventional resource allocation approach.
Firstly, (11b) can be removed from the problem because, in practice, the maximum aggregate data rate achieved by each UE is always less than its associated BBU capacity, regardless of the amount of allocated PRBs and transmission power. As such, it is not essential to enforce (11b). Furthermore, we relax ωsku into continuous values where (11f) can be transformed into

0 ≤ ωsku ≤ 1 ∀u ∈ URRH,s, s ∈ S, k ∈ K

(12)

and express the lower bound SINR experienced by UE u associated with RRH s on PRB k as

ΓsLkBu

=

psk u gsk u

.

Imax,sku + PAWGN

(13)

Then, the lower bound of the achievable data rate of UE u associated with RRH s on PRB k can be calculated as

rsLkBu = B log2(1 + ΓsLkBu ).

(14)

Next, we can express the lower bound of (11) as

B. Lower-Level
After the upper-level, the remaining problem is to allocate PRBs and power among admitted UEs for each RRH. From the upper-level of the proposed network slicing scheme, we obtain the solutions for UE admission, UE association and virtual BBU capacity allocation problems, which reduce the network slicing problem in (5) to

max
ωs k u , ps k u

Wu ωsk u r sk u

s ∈S k ∈K u ∈URRH, s

subject to

(11)

ωskursku ≥ Rmin,u ∀u ∈ URRH,s, s ∈ S
k ∈K
ωskursku ≤ rvBBU,u ∀u ∈ URRH,s, s ∈ S
k ∈K
ωsku psku ≤ Pmax,s ∀s ∈ S
k ∈K u ∈URRH, s
ωik j pik j giku ≤ Imax,sku
i ∈S\{s } j ∈URRH,i

(11a) (11b) (11c)

max
ωs k u , ps k u

Wu ωsk u r sLkBu

s ∈S k ∈K u ∈URRH, s

(15)

subject to (11c)-(11e), (11g), (12) and

ωskursLkBu ≥ Rmin,u ∀u ∈ URRH,s, s ∈ S.
k ∈K

(15a)

We can further simplify the problem and rewrite (15) as

max
ωsku psku

s∈S

k ∈K

u ∈URRH, s

Wu

ωsku

η

LB sku

(16)

subject to (11c)-(11e), (11g), (12) and

ωsku

η

LB sku

≥

Rmin,u B

k ∈K

∀u ∈ URRH,s, s ∈ S

(16a)

where

η

LB sku

=

r sLkBu / B

is

the

achievable

lower

bound

spectral

efﬁciency of UE u associated with RRH s on PRB k. We can

interpret (16) as a weighted spectral efﬁciency maximization

problem of the network.

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

8

Next, we can write the Lagrangian function of (16) as

L (ω,p, β,φ,λ,µ,ν,τ,ρ )

=

Wuωs k u η Ls kBu

s ∈Sk ∈K u ∈URRH, s

+

βsu

ωs k u η Ls kBu−

Rmin,u B

s ∈Su ∈URRH, s

k ∈K

+

λsku Imax,sku−

ωik j pik jgiku

s ∈Sk ∈K u ∈URRH, s

i ∈S\{s } j ∈URRH,i

+

µsk 1−

ωsku +

ρs k u ps k u

s∈Sk ∈K

u ∈URRH, s

s ∈Sk ∈K u ∈URRH, s

+

τs k u (1−ωs k u )+

νskuωsku

s ∈Sk ∈K u ∈URRH, s

s ∈Sk ∈K u ∈URRH, s

+ φs Pmax,s−

ωskupsku ,

s∈S

k ∈K u ∈URRH, s

(17)

where βsu, φs, λsku, µsk , νsku, τsku and ρsku are the nonnegative Lagrange multipliers corresponding to constraints (16a), (11c)-(11e), (12) and (11g), respectively. Then, the Lagrangian dual function of (16) can be expressed as D(β, φ, λ, µ, ν, τ, ρ) = maxωsku,psku L (ω, p, β, φ, λ, µ, ν, τ, ρ) and thus the dual optimization problem can be formulated as

min

D(β, φ, λ, µ, ν, τ, ρ).

βsu,φs,λsk u,µsk,νsk u ,τsk u,ρsk u

(18)

Note that any dual problem (e.g., (18)) generally leads to the upper bound solution for the primal problem (e.g., (16)) due to the existence of a nonzero duality gap. However, it has been proved in [47] that the duality gap is nearly zero in a multicarrier system such as LTE if the number of PRBs is sufﬁciently large. Thus, solving (18) provides a near-optimal solution to (16).
Suppose that UE u has been allocated PRB k, i.e., ωsku = 1. Then, the derivative of (17) with respect to psku gives the following Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions [48], [49]:

∂L

∂ psku = ωsku (Gsku − φs ) + ρs = 0

(19)

ωsku psku (Gsku − φs ) = 0

(20)

where

Gsku

=

( Imax, s k u

gsku (Wu + βsu ) + PAWGN + pskugsku ) ln 2

−

λik j gsk j .

i ∈S\{s } j ∈URRH,i

(21)

From (20), the power allocation can be performed for all u ∈ URRH,s, s ∈ S and k ∈ K as

where [x]+ = max(0, x). Next, the derivative of (17) with respect to ωsku yields the following KKT conditions:

∂L

∂ωsku = Hsku − µs + νsku − τsku = 0

(23)

ωsku (Hsku − µs − τsku ) = 0

(24)

where

Hsku = (Wu + βsu )ηLskBu − φs +

λik j gsk j psku.

i ∈S\{s } j ∈URRH,i

(25)

Here, (23)-(24) yield Hsku − µsk − τsku = 0 if ωsku = 1 and Hsku − µsk −τsku ≤ 0 if ωsku = 0. As such, we can deduce that the UE that corresponds to the largest value of Hsku among all u ∈ URRH,s, s ∈ S and k ∈ K should be allocated the PRB.

Since one PRB can only be allocated to a UE among those

associated with the same RRH, which is enforced in (11e), the

optimal PRB allocation can be acquired by

ωsku = 10

u = arg maxi∈URRH,s Hski ∀s ∈ S, k ∈ K . otherwise

(26)

With (22) and (26), we can solve the dual problem in (17)

using an iterative subgradient method [50] to update the

Lagrange multipliers:

βs(tu+1) =  βs(tu) − δ1

ωsku ηLskBu

−

Rmin,u B

k ∈K

 +

(27)

∀u ∈ URRH,s, s ∈ S

φs(t+1) = φs(t) − δ2

Pmax,s −

ωsku psku

k ∈K u ∈URRH, s

 +

(28)

∀s ∈ S

λ s(tk+u1)

=

λ

(t ) sku

−

δ3

Imax,sku −

pik j ωik j giku

i ∈S\{s } j ∈URRH,i

 +

∀u ∈ URRH,s, s ∈ S, k ∈ K

(29)

where

βs(tu) ,

φs(t )

and

λ

(t ) sku

are

the

values

of

βsu ,

φs

and

λsku at the t-th iteration, respectively, and δ1, δ2 and δ3

are the positive step sizes that satisfy the inﬁnite travel

conditions [50]. The process of updating the PRB and power

allocation, and Lagrange multipliers is repeated until con-

vergence or a predeﬁned maximum number of iterations,

Tmax is reached. Note that µsk , νsku, τsku and ρsku are not updated because they have been absorbed in the KKT

conditions and thus do not affect the solutions in (22) and

(26). As such, we can omit the terms in (17) corresponding

to these Lagrange multipliers. The asymptotic computational

complexity of PRB and power allocation can be shown to be

of O Tmax (3|K | + 1) s∈S |URRH,s | + |S| .

psku =

φs +

Wu + βsu i ∈S\{s } j ∈URRH,i λik j gsk j ln 2

− Imax,sku + PAWGN +

gsku

C. Implementation
(22) The proposed network slicing scheme is implemented in the new network slicing module in the BBU pool (cf. Fig. 1). This module will ﬁrst collect channel information from

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

9

the RRHs, trafﬁc and priority information from each UE, and QoS requirements and SLA information or tenant priority from tenants via their core networks. Then, the module will execute the proposed network slicing scheme accordingly. The upperand lower-level of the network slicing scheme are executed in coarse and ﬁne time granularity respectively. The upper-level is intended to be executed in the order of LTE frames, that is, tens of milliseconds (as each LTE frame spans 10 ms). As we have designed the admission control, user association and virtual BBU allocation algorithms in such a way that their computational complexity is reasonably low, the execution of these algorithms in the order of LTE frames is reasonable. In fact, the admission control and user association process in LTE systems normally need tens of milliseconds to complete a user handover [51], thus our proposed scheme is compatible with LTE. The upper-level can be executed periodically, or triggered when certain conditions are met (e.g., when new or handover users are requesting admission, or the channel has varied signiﬁcantly). In the latter case, the upper-level can be triggered to be executed at the start of the next LTE frame or after several LTE frames. The lower-level should be executed every 1 ms as speciﬁed by LTE for resource allocation among users and such execution is possible in such a short interval as it can be performed through parallel computation on power and PRB allocation solution updates, i.e., (22) and (26) as well as on the subgradient update, i.e., (27)-(29).
The computational burden of the proposed scheme could grow fast in a dense network if we consider that a single centralized BBU pool manages all the RRHs. Such a scenario is generally impractical because sophisticated fronthaul transport networks would be needed and the BBU processing would be computationally exhaustive [52]. Nevertheless, a multicloud radio access network architecture [52] has been proposed to address this issue, where multiple clouds are introduced with each managing a subset of nearby RRHs. Under this architecture, our proposed network slicing scheme can still be applicable and implemented in each cloud. In fact, the proposed scheme is more suitable under the multicloud architecture as the number of RRHs managed by each cloud is smaller, thus the computational complexity becomes relatively lower.
In practice, a perfectly synchronized shared spectrum network is unrealistic if rapid channel reporting is considered. Rapid channel reporting would introduce large delay in the network slicing process, especially during PRB and power allocation. As such, it is impossible to allocate PRBs every 1 ms, as speciﬁed in LTE, while channel conditions are reported as rapid as every 1 ms. Nevertheless, we can reduce the frequency of channel reporting by increasing the reporting period. In fact, this is compliant with the channel quality indicator (CQI) reporting in LTE where the reporting period can be adjusted to be multiple of TTIs. Considering that the channel is slow-fading, the network slicing solution obtained with rapid channel reporting will not diverge much from that with less rapid channel reporting. Hence, the proposed scheme can still be feasible under an imperfectly synchronized shared spectrum network.

V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
The performance of the proposed network slicing scheme is evaluated using Monte Carlo simulations. We consider a two-tenant H-CRAN that consists of one M-RRH and ﬁve SRRHs with the ﬁrst and second tenant being denoted as VNO 1 and VNO 2 respectively. The number of UEs associated with each tenant is set to 50, which is large enough for observing the numbers of admitted and rejected UEs. The coverage radius of the M-RRH is set to 500 m and the S-RRHs are randomly distributed within the network. The number of PRBs is set to 100 according to the LTE speciﬁcations. Also, we assume that CcBUP = 50 Mb/s and the M-RRH can support as much as the BBU pool, i.e., Cbh = 50 Mb/s. For the S-RRH, Cfh = 10 Mb/s is set as the small-cell fronthaul capacity which should be much smaller than the macrocell backhaul capacity. For the transmission power parameters, Pmax,0 = 43 dBm and Pmax,s = 30 dBm for s 0 are set following the LTE speciﬁcations. The priority weight of UEs belonging to each tenant is randomly generated. We consider an independently and identically distributed (i.i.d.) Rayleigh fading channel with zero-mean and unit-variance. Log-normal shadowing is also considered, which is i.i.d. with zero-mean and a standard deviation of 10 dB. The following path loss models are adopted: 128.1 + 37.6 log(dm) dB and 140.7 + 36.7 log(ds) where dm is the distance in km between the M-RRH and the UE whereas ds is that between the S-RRH and the UE [53]. The noise power spectral density and noise ﬁgure are respectively set to -174 dBm/Hz and 9 dB [53]. For the proposed scheme, δ1, δ2 and δ3 are set according to the nonsummable diminishing rule [50], and Nw = 10000 and Tmax = 100 are set. We adopt the following schemes for performance comparison (including the proposed scheme):
1) Fixed BBU capacity and Fixed Resource allocation (FBFR): The BBU pool capacity is predivided to the tenants according to their priority. The UEs are then admitted according to their priority based on the available BBU capacity allocated to their associated tenant. The admitted UEs are then associated with RRHs based on wideband channel quality and fronthaul and backhaul capacity availability (which is similar to the proposed scheme). After that, the admitted UEs that are associated with the same tenant receive equal BBU capacity. If the fronthaul (or backhaul) capacity of the RRH is lower than the sum of the BBU capacity of the RRH’s associated UEs, these UEs will be reallocated with equal BBU capacity based on the fronthaul (or backhaul) capacity. The number of PRBs is also predivided among the tenants based on their priority, in which PRB and power allocation are performed accordingly.
2) Dynamic BBU capacity and Fixed Resource allocation (DBFR): The PRB and power allocation is performed in a similar way as in FBFR except that the BBU capacity allocation is dynamically performed as in Section IV-A.
3) Fixed BBU capacity and Dynamic Resource allocation: The BBU capacity allocation is performed in a similar way as in FBFR except that the PRB and power allocation is dynamically performed as in Section IV-B.

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

10

4) Dynamic BBU capacity and Dynamic Resource allocation (DBDR): The proposed scheme presented in Section IV that performs dynamic network slicing.
Next, we consider two trafﬁc models that are provided by the tenants: video streaming and web browsing. The video streaming trafﬁc model requires Rmin = 1 Mb/s and Rmax = 1.5 Mb/s whereas the web browsing trafﬁc model requires Rmin = 100 kb/s and Rmax = 300 kb/s for each UE [19]. All simulation results are averaged over 100 runs.
A. Impact of Priority of Tenants Providing Similar Services
Here, the effect of varying the tenant priority of a two-tenant H-CRAN where both tenants provide video streaming services for both the proposed and baseline schemes is investigated.
In Fig. 3(a), DBDR achieves the best total throughput performance, which is attributed to its dynamic allocation of baseband and radio resources among the tenants. Next, we can ﬁnd that dynamic BBU capacity allocation contributes slight improvements of about 1% over ﬁxed allocation, as shown by DBDR and DBFR over FBDR and FBFR, respectively. This is because the proposed dynamic BBU capacity allocation mechanism ensures the BBU capacity allocated to each UE to meet its QoS requirement. Meanwhile, the ﬁxed BBU capacity allocation mechanism does not take into account the QoS requirements of the admitted UE when allocating the BBU capacity to the admitted UEs. In fact, some of the admitted UEs receive insufﬁcient BBU capacities due to insufﬁcient fronthaul (or backhaul) capacity of the associated RRHs. However, the improvement is small because both tenants impose the same data rate requirements. Thus, the total numbers of admitted UEs as well as the BBU capacity allocated to the admitted UEs for both ﬁxed and dynamic BBU capacity allocation are nearly identical, resulting in nearly identical throughput performance. On the other hand, dynamic PRB and power allocation results in substantial throughput improvements of about 35% over ﬁxed PRB and power allocation, as exhibited by DBDR and FBDR over DBFR and FBFR, respectively. This is because DBFR and FBFR predivide the number of PRBs among the tenants, thus limiting the achievable throughput.
In Fig. 3(b), both DBDR and FBDR provide the best and comparable network slicing performance as the ratio of the throughput achieved by VNO 1 to that of VNO 2 is almost equivalent to the priority ratio. This thanks to the dynamic PRB and power allocation mechanism which allows full exploitation of multiuser diversity of the channel to achieve fair throughput distribution among the tenants. The throughput achieved by FBFR and DBFR for VNO 1 and VNO 2 is different when the priority ratio is 1:1 because both schemes split the number of PRBs between the two tenants in proportion to the tenants’ priority and allocate PRBs to the UEs based on only the user priority. Such allocation cannot guarantee even throughput distribution between the two tenants. Besides that, although both tenants have equal numbers of PRBs when the priority ratio is 1:1, the number of PRBs received by each of the two tenants is only half of the channel bandwidth and the PRBs may not always have equal

quality since the channel gain of each PRB between individual

RRHs and UEs is different.

To further conﬁrm the observations in Fig. 3(b), we calculate

the normalized throughput of each UE, ru with respect to its

target

minimum

data

rate,

i.e.,

ru

=

. Ru
Rmin, u

Then,

we

evaluate

Jain’s fairness index [54] for the interslice case as Ξinter =

(
|N |

) n∈N Rn /vn 2 , n∈N (Rn /vn )2

where

Rn

=

u∈Un ru. Fig. 3(c) shows the

fairness performance of the two-tenant H-CRAN with both

VNO 1 and VNO 2 providing video streaming services. In

line with Fig. 3(b), the fairness performance of DBDR and

FBDR are comparable and better than the other two schemes.

FBDR is superior to the proposed DBDR because the former

divides the BBU pool capacity proportionally to the priority of

the tenants, where both provide the same video services, and

allocates virtual BBU capacity evenly to the admitted UEs.

Moreover, the DBDR scheme allocates virtual BBU capacity

according to the overall priority of each admitted UE, which

is slightly inefﬁcient than FBDR in this scenario. Though, the

performance gap between them is negligible as both of them

have achieved a high fairness index exceeding 0.9.

Fig. 3(d) illustrates the intraslice fairness performance of the

H-CRAN, where Jain’s fairness index is evaluated as Ξintra =

( ) u∈Ua ru 2 . | Ua | u∈Ua (ru )2

In

this

case,

both

DBDR

and

FBDR

perform

as well as those in the interslice case. However, DBFR and

FBFR perform poorly because ﬁxed PRB allocation limits the

number of PRBs allocated to each tenant, thus limiting the

achievable throughput fairness performance.

Figs. 3(e) and 3(f) respectively plot the interslice and

intraslice cumulative distribution function (CDF) of the nor-

malized UE throughput, i.e., ru for priority ratio 1:2. From Fig. 3(e), it is seen that compared to DBFR and FBFR, DBDR

and FBDR have more UEs achieving nonzero throughput and

their minimum data rates. Fig. 3(f) also shows that DBDR

and FBDR achieve fairer throughput performance compared

to DBFR and FBFR for both tenants. This is because the

latter schemes predivide the number of PRBs among the

tenants, which limit the achievable throughput and fairness

performance. As the performance trends are similar for other

priority ratios, we omit the corresponding CDF results.

Figs. 3(g) and 3(h) illustrate respectively the number of

admitted UEs (in fractional form) with minimum QoS satisfac-

tion (i.e., admitted UEs with their throughput larger or equal

to their minimum data rate) and the number of UEs being

denied admission. In Fig. 3(g), both DBDR and FBDR achieve

higher numbers of UEs with minimum QoS satisfaction than

DBFR and FBFR. This is because the latter schemes limit

the number of PRBs available to each tenant according to the

priority ratio, thus leading to inability to guarantee minimum

QoS satisfaction for the UEs. In Fig. 3(h), all the schemes

reject the same number of UEs across all priority ratios, except

FBFR and FBDR. At the priority ratio of 1:1, the number of

UEs rejected by the latter two schemes is larger than those by

the other two schemes. This is due to the inefﬁcient ﬁxed BBU

pool capacity allocation that predivides the BBU capacity to

the tenants based on their priority. Although the sum of the

remaining cloud BBU pool capacity of all tenants is sufﬁcient

to admit more UEs but this is not allowed by ﬁxed cloud BBU

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

11

Throughput (Mb/s)

40

35

FBFR

DBFR

FBDR

DBDR

30

25

1:2

3:4

1:1

4:3

2:1

Priority Ratio

(a)

Throughput (Mb/s)

30
25
20
15
10
5 1:2 3:4 1:1 4:3 2:1
Priority Ratio
(b)

FBFR - VNO1 DBFR - VNO1 FBDR - VNO1 DBDR - VNO1 FBFR - VNO2 DBFR - VNO2 FBDR - VNO2 DBDR - VNO2

Interslice Jain's Fairness Index

1

0.99

0.98

0.97 0.96

FBFR DBFR FBDR DBDR

0.95

1:2

3:4

1:1

4:3

2:1

Priority Ratio

(c)

Intraslice Jain's Fairness Index

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5 1:2 3:4 1:1 4:3 2:1 Priority Ratio
(d)

FBFR - VNO1 DBFR - VNO1 FBDR - VNO1 DBDR - VNO1 FBFR - VNO2 DBFR - VNO2 FBDR - VNO2 DBDR - VNO2

CDF

1

FBFR

0.9

DBFR

FBDR

0.8

DBDR

0.7

0.6

0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 Normalized UE Rate w.r.t. R min
(e)

CDF

1

FBFR - VNO1

0.8

DBFR - VNO1

FBDR - VNO1

DBDR - VNO1

0.6

FBFR - VNO2

DBFR - VNO2

FBDR - VNO2

0.4

DBDR - VNO2

0.2 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 Normalized UE Rate w.r.t. R min
(f)

# Admitted UEs with Min QoS

60 50 40 30 20 10
0 1:2

FBFR DBFR FBDR DBDR

3:4

1:1

4:3

2:1

Priority Ratio

(g)

# Rejected UEs

60

FBFR

DBFR

55

FBDR

DBDR

50

45

40

1:2

3:4

1:1

4:3

2:1

Priority Ratio

(h)

Fig. 3. (a) Total throughput, (b) throughput of VNO 1 and VNO 2, (c) interslice fairness, (d) intraslice fairness, (e) CDF of the normalized UE throughput with priority ratio 1:2, (f) CDF of the normalized UE throughput of VNO 1 and VNO 2 with priority ratio 1:2, (g) average number of admitted UEs with minimum QoS satisfaction, and (h) average number of rejected UEs of the H-CRAN where both VNO 1 and VNO 2 provide video streaming services.

pool capacity allocation.
B. Impact of Priority of Tenants Providing Different Services
Here, we investigate the effect of varying the tenant priority of the H-CRAN where VNO 1 and VNO 2 provide video streaming and web browsing services, respectively, for all the schemes. In fact, such prioritization of these VNOs is equivalent to prioritization of services.
In Fig. 4(a), DBDR again outperforms other schemes due to its dynamic baseband and radio resource allocation. Also, Fig. 4(b) shows that the throughput achieved by VNO 1 is larger than that by VNO 2 because video streaming has a higher data rate requirements than web browsing. Notably, the difference between dynamic and ﬁxed BBU capacity allocation is huge because the tenants imposes different data rate requirements. As ﬁxed BBU capacity allocation splits the BBU pool capacity between tenants in proportion to their priority, the capacity allocated to VNO 2 is over-sufﬁcient due to its much lower data rate requirements. As a result, all the UEs associated with VNO 2 are admitted and the BBU capacity allocated to these UEs is over-sufﬁcient. Meanwhile, the number of admitted UEs associated with VNO 1 that imposes higher data rate requirements is very limited due to the inefﬁcient ﬁxed BBU capacity allocation. Hence, the number of admitted UEs is much lower and thus the achievable network throughput is much lower. On the other hand, the proposed dynamic BBU capacity allocation mechanism does not split the BBU pool capacity as in the ﬁxed BBU capacity allocation mechanism but fully maximizes the number of admitted UEs according to their priority as well as their associated tenant’s priority based on the availability of the whole BBU pool capacity. Therefore, it allows more UEs to be admitted to the network and hence achieving higher network throughput.

It is difﬁcult to justify the interslice fairness performance of the schemes in Fig. 4(b) as the trafﬁc services provided by the tenants are with different data rate requirements. Nonetheless, we can observe in Fig. 4(c) that DBDR always achieves a fairness index of above 0.8 and outperforms the other schemes across most of the priority ratios. Interestingly, FBDR and FBFR perform poorly because ﬁxed BBU capacity allocation does not take into account heterogeneous service requirements, which results in unfair admission control and throughput performance. In Fig. 4(d), DBDR and FBDR perform equivalently as in the scenario in Section V-A due to the dynamic PRB and power allocation mechanism.
Figs. 4(e) and 4(f) respectively plot the interslice and intraslice CDFs of the normalized UE throughput, i.e., ru for priority ratio 1:2. In Fig. 4(e), compared to other schemes, DBDR results in more UEs achieving nonzero throughput and minimum data rates. In Fig. 4(f), DBDR is overall the best performer among the schemes. Although FBDR is superior to DBDR for VNO 2 but the former is signiﬁcantly inferior to DBDR as well as DBFR for VNO 1. Again, we omit the CDF results for other priority ratios due to similar trends.
Figs. 4(g) and 4(h) respectively show the number of admitted UEs (in fractional form) with minimum QoS satisfaction and the number of UEs being denied admission. It is observed in Fig. 4(g) that DBDR outperforms other schemes. This indicates that the proposed DBDR scheme is capable of providing satisfactory QoS experience for the network regardless of service types provided by the tenants, thanks to the dynamic network slicing mechanism of the proposed DBDR scheme. In Fig. 4(h), FBFR and FBDR have rejected more UEs compared to the other two schemes. Here, we can conﬁrm that ﬁxed BBU pool capacity allocation based on tenant priority is inefﬁcient, especially in scenarios where the tenants are providing trafﬁc services with different target minimum and maximum data

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

12

Throughput (Mb/s)

40 30 20 10
0 1:2

FBFR DBFR FBDR DBDR

3:4

1:1

4:3

2:1

Priority Ratio

(a)

Throughput (Mb/s)

40
30
20
10
0 1:2 3:4 1:1 4:3 2:1
Priority Ratio
(b)

FBFR - VNO1 DBFR - VNO1 FBDR - VNO1 DBDR - VNO1 FBFR - VNO2 DBFR - VNO2 FBDR - VNO2 DBDR - VNO2

Interslice Jain's Fairness Index

1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5
1:2

FBFR DBFR FBDR DBDR

3:4

1:1

4:3

2:1

Priority Ratio

(c)

Intraslice Jain's Fairness Index

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2 1:2 3:4 1:1 4:3 2:1 Priority Ratio
(d)

FBFR - VNO1 DBFR - VNO1 FBDR - VNO1 DBDR - VNO1 FBFR - VNO2 DBFR - VNO2 FBDR - VNO2 DBDR - VNO2

CDF

1

0.8

0.6

0.4
0.2
0 0

FBFR DBFR FBDR DBDR
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 Normalized UE Rate w.r.t. R
min
(e)

CDF

1

0.8

FBFR - VNO1

0.6

DBFR - VNO1

FBDR - VNO1

0.4

DBDR - VNO1 FBFR - VNO2

DBFR - VNO2

0.2

FBDR - VNO2

DBDR - VNO2

0 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3

Normalized UE Rate w.r.t. R
min

(f)

# Admitted UEs with Min QoS

100

FBFR

DBFR

80

FBDR

DBDR

60

40

20

1:2

3:4

1:1

4:3

2:1

Priority Ratio

(g)

# Rejected UEs

50 40 30 20 10
0 1:2

FBFR DBFR FBDR DBDR

3:4

1:1

4:3

2:1

Priority Ratio

(h)

Fig. 4. (a) Total throughput, (b) throughput of VNO 1 and VNO 2, (c) interslice fairness, (d) intraslice fairness, (e) CDF of the normalized UE throughput with priority ratio 1:2, (f) CDF of the normalized UE throughput of VNO 1 and VNO 2 with priority ratio 1:2, (g) average number of admitted UEs with minimum QoS satisfaction, and (h) average number of rejected UEs of the H-CRAN where both VNO 1 and VNO 2 provide video streaming and web browsing services, respectively.

rates. When the priority of the tenant that provides services with high target minimum and maximum data rates such as video streaming is low, the number of UEs rejected would be large if the BBU pool capacity has been allocated in advance. Only when the priority is increasing, the number of UEs admitted for the corresponding tenant can be increased, as demonstrated by the decreasing trends of the FBFR scheme and the FBDR scheme in Fig. 4(h) with increasing priority of VNO 1.
C. Impact of Fronthaul/Backhaul Capacities and Macrocell/Small-Cell Coexistence
Here, we examine the impact of Cfh and Cbh as well as the coexistence of macrocell and small-cell to the proposed network slicing scheme with the same simulation setting as in Section V-A.
Fig. 5(a) shows the throughput performance of the proposed scheme with varying Cfh with Cbh = 50 Mb/s. When Cfh = 0 Mb/s, all admitted UEs can only associate with the MRRH. As such, this scenario is equivalent to that with only the macrocell, thus resulting in the most inferior throughput performance. The proposed scheme performs the best when Cfh = 5 Mb/s but the throughput gradually deteriorates with increasing Cfh. This is because the larger Cfh allows more UEs to be associated with the S-RRHs. As a result, the SRRHs cannot satisfy the QoS requirements of the associated UEs since they have low transmission power budgets. Other performance results of the proposed scheme have similar trends as in Fig. 5(a) except that the interslice fairness and number of rejected UEs remain consistent across all Cfh.
Fig. 5(b) shows that the throughput performance with varying Cbh with Cfh = 10 Mb/s. The throughput performance of the proposed scheme remains consistent because most of the

admitted UEs associate with the S-RRHs, as the altter can provide better channel quality. Other performance results of the proposed scheme also remain consistent.
Fig. 5(c) shows that the H-CRAN with both macrocell and small-cells outperforms the macrocell-only and small-cellsonly networks. This is because the former scenario has more power resources due to the coexistence of both M-RRH and S-RRHs. In addition, the UEs located near the S-RRHs can experience better channel conditions and the M-RRH can serve those UEs who are located far from the S-RRHs. The scenario with only small-cells is inferior to that with only macrocell because some UEs are far from the S-RRHs and the lowpower S-RRHs need to spend more power to reach these UEs, thereby resulting in lower throughput.
The interslice fairness performance of the scenario with both macrocell and small-cells is better than that with only smallcells but is equivalent to that with only the macrocell, as shown in Fig. 5(d). This is because the M-RRH has enough power to serve all the admitted UEs and guarantee the throughput fairness among their tenants. Overall, the coexistence of both macrocells and small-cells can achieve better network slicing performance than that of only either of the two.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper has proposed a new dynamic network slicing scheme for multitenant H-CRANs. The proposed scheme consists of an upper-level that manages admission control, UE association and BBU capacity allocation; and a lower-level that manages PRB and power allocation among admitted UEs. Simulation results show that the proposed scheme achieves higher throughput, fairness and QoS performance compared to the baseline schemes, especially in scenarios with tenants of heterogeneous services. Also, the simulation results infer

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

13

Throughput (Mb/s) Throughput (Mb/s) Throughput (Mb/s) Interslice Jain's Fairness Index

44

Priority 1:2

42

Priority 3:4

Priority 1:1

40

38

36

34

0

5

10

15

20

Fronthaul Capacity (Mb/s)

(a)

40 35 30 25 20
40

Priority 1:2 Priority 3:4 Priority 1:1

45

50

55

60

Backhaul Capacity (Mb/s)

(b)

40 38 36 34 32 30 28
1:2

Macrocell Small-Cells Macro + Small-Cells

3:4

1:1

4:3

2:1

Priority Ratio

(c)

1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5
1:2

Macrocell Small-Cells Macro + Small-Cells

3:4

1:1

4:3

2:1

Priority Ratio

(d)

Fig. 5. Total throughput performance of the H-CRAN with varying (a) fronthaul capacity and (b) backhaul capacity. (c) Total throughput and (d) interslice fairness performances of the two-tenant H-CRAN network with only a macrocell, with only small-cells, and with a macrocell and small-cells.

that compared to ﬁxed BBU capacity allocation, the proposed dynamic BBU capacity allocation mechanism (which jointly consists of dynamic admission control, UE association and BBU capacity allocation among UEs) can more efﬁciently maximize the number of admitted UEs and assign BBU capacity to the latter, and achieves higher network throughput; especially in scenarios with tenants of heterogeneous services. On the other hand, the dynamic PRB and power allocation mechanism of the proposed scheme can achieve higher throughput and QoS performance compared to the baseline schemes due to efﬁcient multiuser diversity exploitation across all PRBs. With dynamic allocation of all network resources, the proposed scheme is able to maintain a high degree of fairness in scenarios with tenants providing homogeneous and heterogeneous services.

APPENDIX A

Consider a gradient-based resource allocation framework
where the resource allocation decision is the solution to u∈U F ′(R¯u )Ru, where Ru and R¯u are the instantaneous and
average rates respectively [40]–[42]. Clearly, (5) is a gradientbased resource allocation problem with Wu = F ′(R¯u ). To achieve various notions of fairness, the weighted α-fairness
function can be adopted as the utility [42], [43]:

Fα (R¯u )

=

̟̟uu

(1 − log(

α)−1 R¯u )

R¯u1−α

α ≥ 0, α α=1

1

(30)

where ̟ is the weighting coefﬁcient corresponding to UE

u and α ≥ 0 is a parameter that determines the notion of fairness. With (30), we yield Wu = Fα′ (R¯u ) = ̟u/R¯uα where wu = 1/R¯uα and ̟u = vn if u ∈ Un, and thus the solution to (5) is weighted α-fair. In particular, the solution corresponds

to maximum throughput, proportional fairness and max-min

fairness when α = 0, α = 1 and α → ∞, respectively.

APPENDIX B
Suppose that feasible {au }, {bsu }, {cvB,u } and {ωsku } are given, (5) can be reduced to

max

Wu au bsuωskursku,

ps k u

s∈S k∈K

(31)

subject to (5a)-(5f) and nonnegative {psku }. Clearly, (31) and (5a)-(5f) are smooth, and rsku is a nonlinear logarithmic function and nonconcave with psku. Thus, (31) is a smooth,

nonlinear and nonconvex programming problem with continuous variables psku, which has been proved to be generally NP-hard [55]. Moreover, (31) is a weighted sum rate utility maximization problem, which has been proved in [56] and [57] to be NP-hard, further validating the NP-hardness of (31). Then, the problem in (5) is also NP-hard as its reduced problem in (31) is already NP-hard.

APPENDIX C
Let us deﬁne a 0-1 knapsack problem as follows: Deﬁnition 1: Suppose there is a set of items, M to be ﬁlled in a knapsack with a weight capacity of X. Each item i ∈ M has a weight of xi and corresponds to a nonnegative proﬁt value of yi. A 0-1 knapsack problem is to ﬁll the knapsack with the items in such a way that the total proﬁt is maximized without exceeding the weight capacity of the knapsack. By Deﬁnition 1, the following can be obtained with respect to (6): U = M, i = u, X = CcBUP, xi = Rmin,u and yi = Wu.

APPENDIX D

There are only two options for computing V (u, i) for UE u:

1) Reject UE u: In this case, the maximum objective

function value for {1, 2, . . . , u − 1} with the capacity of

id is V (u − 1, i).

2) Admit UE u: In this case, which is only possible with

Rmin,u ≤ id, we gain Wu for the objective function

value and add Rmin,u to the total minimum data rate.

The maximum objective function value for the set of

remaining UEs {1, 2, . . . , u − 1} with the capacity of

(id − Rmin,u )

is V

u − 1, i −

Rmin, u d

. In total, Wu +

V

u − 1, i −

Rmin, u d

is yielded.

Since (6) is a maximization problem, the larger objective

function value of the above two cases is the correct one. It

is noteworthy that, for Rmin,u > id, V (u, i) will be computed as V (u − 1, i) because the capacity will be exceeded if UE u

is admitted. Hence, UE u can only be rejected.

APPENDIX E
Let us deﬁne a 0-1 multiple knapsack problem as follows: Deﬁnition 2: Suppose that M and L are the sets of items and knapsacks, respectively. Each item i ∈ M has a weight of xi and gives a nonnegative proﬁt value of yi whereas each knapsack j ∈ L has a weight capacity of Xj . The problem is

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

14

to ﬁll all the knapsacks with the items such that the total proﬁt of each knapsack is maximized without exceeding its weight capacity.
By mapping Deﬁnition 2 with (9), we yield Ua = M, L = S, i = u, j = s, xi = Rmin,u, Xj = Cxh,s and yi = Wu Γwb,su.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. Geoffrey Ye Li and Dr. Guocong Song for their discussions on the NUM framework. The authors would also like to thank the editors and reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. L. Lee, J. Loo, and T. C. Chuah, “A new network slicing framework for multi-tenant heterogeneous cloud radio access networks,” in Proc. ICAEESE, Putrajaya, Malaysia, Nov. 2016, pp. 414–420.
[2] K. Samdanis, X. Costa-Perez, and V. Sciancalepore, “From network sharing to multi-tenancy: The 5G network slice broker,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 32–39, Jul. 2016.
[3] X. Costa-Perez, J. Swetina, T. Guo, R. Mahindra, and S. Rangarajan, “Radio access network virtualization for future mobile carrier networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 27–35, Jul. 2013.
[4] C. Liang and F. R. Yu, “Wireless virtualization for next generation mobile cellular networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Mag., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 61–69, Feb. 2015.
[5] M. Richart, J. Baliosian, J. Serrat, and J. L. Gorricho, “Resource slicing in virtual wireless networks: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Netw. Service Manag., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 462–476, Sep. 2016.
[6] “Uk strategy and plan for 5g & digitisation - driving economic growth and productivity,” Future Communications Challenge Group (FCCG), UK, pp. 1–52, Jan. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ uploads/attachment\_data/ﬁle/582640/FCCG\_Interim\_Report.pdf
[7] P. C. Garces, X. Costa-Perez, K. Samdanis, and A. Banchs, “RMSC: A cell slicing controller for virtualized multi-tenant mobile networks,” in Proc. 81st IEEE VTC Spring, Glasgow, UK, May 2015, pp. 1–6.
[8] I. da Silva, G. Mildh, A. Kaloxylos, P. Spapis, E. Buracchini, A. Trogolo, G. Zimmermann, and N. Bayer, “Impact of network slicing on 5G Radio Access Networks,” in Proc. EuCNC, Athens, Greece, Jun. 2016, pp. 153–157.
[9] W. Gerhardt, C. Cordero, C. Reberger, and T. Dolan, “Mobile network as a service - a new solution architecture for mobile network operators,” CISCO, pp. 1–18, Mar. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.cisco. com/c/dam/en\_us/about/ac79/docs/sp/NaaS\_White-Paper.pdf
[10] X. Zhou, R. Li, T. Chen, and H. Zhang, “Network slicing as a service: Enabling enterprises’ own software-deﬁned cellular networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 146–153, Jul. 2016.
[11] F. Fu and U. C. Kozat, “Wireless network virtualization as a sequential auction game,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, San Diego, California, Mar. 2010, pp. 1–9.
[12] Y. Zaki, L. Zhao, C. Goerg, and A. Timm-Giel, “LTE mobile network virtualization,” Mobile Netw. Appl., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 424–432, Aug. 2011.
[13] R. Kokku, R. Mahindra, H. Zhang, and S. Rangarajan, “NVS: A substrate for virtualizing wireless resources in cellular networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 1333–1346, Oct. 2012.
[14] T. Guo and R. Arnott, “Active LTE RAN sharing with partial resource reservation,” in Proc. 78th IEEE VTC Fall, Las Vegas, Nevada, Sep. 2013, pp. 1–5.
[15] J. S. Panchal, R. D. Yates, and M. M. Buddhikot, “Mobile network resource sharing options: performance comparisons,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 4470–4482, Sep. 2013.
[16] M. Kalil, A. Shami, and Y. Ye, “Wireless resources virtualization in LTE systems,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM WKSHPS, Toronto, Ontario, May 2014, pp. 363–368.
[17] M. I. Kamel, L. B. Le, and A. Girard, “LTE wireless network virtualization: Dynamic slicing via ﬂexible scheduling,” in Proc. 80th IEEE VTC Fall, Vancouver, British Columbia, Sep. 2014, pp. 1–5.
[18] A. Moubayed, A. Shami, and H. Lutﬁyya, “Wireless resource virtualization with device-to-device communication underlaying LTE network,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 734–740, Dec. 2015.

[19] M. Jiang, M. Condoluci, and T. Mahmoodi, “Network slicing management & prioritization in 5g mobile systems,” in Proc. 22nd EW Conf., Oulu, Finland, May 2016, pp. 1–6.
[20] M. Jiang, D. Xenakis, S. Costanzo, N. Oassa, and T. Mahmoodi, “Radio resource sharing as a service in 5G: A software-deﬁned networking approach,” Comput. Commun., vol. 107, pp. 13–29, Jul. 2017.
[21] P. Caballero, A. Banchs, G. de Veciana, and X. Costa-Perez, “Network slicing games: Enabling customization in multi-tenant mobile networks,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Atlanta, GA, May 2017, pp. 1–19, to appear.
[22] A. Checko, H. L. Christiansen, Y. Yan, L. Scolari, G. Kardaras, M. S. Berger, and L. Dittmann, “Cloud RAN for mobile networks - a technology overview,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 405–426, Mar. 2015.
[23] S. Khatibi and L. M. Carreia, “A model for virtual radio resource management in virtual RANs,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2015, no. 68, pp. 1–12, Mar. 2015.
[24] M. Jiang, M. Condoluci, and T. Mahmoodi, “Network slicing in 5g: An auction-based model,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Paris, France, May 2017, pp. 1–6, to appear.
[25] Y. L. Lee, T. C. Chuah, J. Loo, and A. Vinel, “Recent Advances in Radio Resource Management for Heterogeneous LTE/LTE-A Networks,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2142–2180, Jun. 2014.
[26] Y. L. Lee, T. C. Chuah, J. Loo, and A. A. El-Saleh, “Fair Resource Allocation with Interference Mitigation and Resource Reuse for LTE/LTE-A Femtocell Networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 8203–8217, Oct. 2016.
[27] ——, “Multi-Objective Resource Allocation for LTE/LTE-A Femtocell/HeNB Networks using Ant Colony Optimization,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 92, no. 2, pp. 565–586, Jan. 2017.
[28] G. Tseliou, F. Adelantado, and C. Verikoukis, “Scalable RAN virtualization in multi-tenant LTE-A heterogeneous networks,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 65, no. 8, pp. 6651–6654, Aug. 2016.
[29] M. Peng, Y. Li, J. Jiang, J. Li, and C. Wang, “Heterogeneous cloud radio access networks: a new perspective for enhancing spectral and energy efﬁciency,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Mag., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 126–135, Dec. 2014.
[30] “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Physical Channels and Modulation,” 3GPP, Jun. 2017. [Online]. Available: http: //www.3gpp.org/ftp//Specs/archive/36\_series/36.211/36211-e30.zip
[31] J. Tang, W. P. Tay, and T. Q. S. Quek, “Cross-Layer Resource Allocation With Elastic Service Scaling in Cloud Radio Access Network,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 5068–5081, Sep. 2015.
[32] K. Guo, M. Sheng, J. Tang, T. Q. S. Quek, and Z. Qiu, “Exploiting hybrid clustering and computation provisioning for green C-RAN,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 4063–4076, Dec. 2016.
[33] J. Tang, W. P. Tay, T. Q. S. Quek, and B. Liang, “System cost minimization in cloud RAN with limited fronthaul capacity,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 3371–3384, May 2017.
[34] “General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) enhancements for Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN) access (Release 14),” 3GPP, Mar. 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.3gpp. org/ftp//Specs/archive/23\_series/23.401/23401-f00.zip
[35] “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA) and Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN); Overall description; Stage 2 (Release 14),” 3GPP, Mar. 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp//Specs/archive/36\_series/ 36.300/36300-e20.zip
[36] C. Koutsimanis and G. Fodor, “A dynamic resource allocation scheme for guaranteed bit rate services in ofdma networks,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Beijing, China, May 2008, pp. 2524–2530.
[37] K. Murphy, “Centralized RAN and fronthaul,” Ericsson, pp. 1–9, May 2015. [Online]. Available: http://www.isemag.com/wp-content/uploads/ 2016/01/C-RAN\_and\_Fronthaul\_White\_Paper.pdf
[38] A. de la Oliva, J. A. Hernandez, D. Larabeiti, and A. Azcorra, “An overview of the CPRI speciﬁcations and its application to C-RAN-based LTE scenarios,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 152–159, Feb. 2016.
[39] M. Jaber, M. A. Imran, R. Tafazolli, and A. Tukmanov, “5G backhaul challenges and emerging research directions: A survey,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 1743–1766, Apr. 2016.
[40] G. Song and Y. Li, “Cross-layer optimization for OFDM wireless networks-Part II: Algorithm Development,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 625–634, Mar. 2005.
[41] R. Agrawal and V. Subramanian, “Optimality of certain channel aware scheduling policies,” in Proc. 2002 Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, 2002, pp. 1–10.

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/TWC.2017.2789294, IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications

15

[42] J. Huang, V. G. Subramaniam, R. Agrawal, and R. A. Berry, “Downlink scheduling and resource allocation for OFDM systems,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 288–296, Jan. 2009.
[43] J. Mo and J. Walrand, “Fair end-to-end window-based congestion control,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 556–567, Oct. 2000.
[44] D. S. Johnson and M. Garey, Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the Theory of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman, 1979.
[45] S. S. Rao, Engineering Optimization: Theory and Practice. Jon Wiley & Sons, 2009.
[46] J. Kleinberg and E. Tardos, Algorithm Design. Pearson Education, 2006.
[47] W. Yu and R. Lui, “Dual methods for nonconvex spectrum optimization of multicarrier systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1310– 1322, Jul. 2006.
[48] S. Boyd and L. Vandenberghe, Convex Optimization. Cambridge University Press, 2004.
[49] K. Kim, Y. Han, and S.-L. Kim, “Joint subcarrier and power allocation in uplink OFDMA systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 526–528, Jun. 2005.
[50] S. Boyd, L. Xiao, and A. Mutapcic, “Subgradient methods,” Stanford University, 2006-07, notes for EE364b.
[51] “Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access (E-UTRA); Requirements for support of radio resource management (Release 14),” 3GPP, Mar. 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp//Specs/archive/36\ _series/36.133/36133-e30.zip
[52] H. Dahrouj, A. Douik, O. Dhifallah, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, and M.-S. Alouini, “Resource allocation in heterogeneous cloud radio access networks: Advances and challenges,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Mag., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 66–73, Jun. 2015.
[53] “Small cell enhancements for E-UTRA and E-UTRAN-physical layer aspects (release 12),” 3GPP, Sep. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/36\_series/36.872/36872-c10.zip
[54] R. Jain, The Art of Computer Systems: Performance Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, 1991.
[55] K. G. Murty and S. N. Kabadi, “Some NP-complete problems in quadratic and nonlinear programming,” Math. Program., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 117–129, Jun. 1987.
[56] Z.-Q. Luo and S. Zhang, “Dynamic spectrum management: Complexity and duality,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 57–73, Feb. 2008.
[57] Y.-F. Liu and Y.-H. Dai, “On the complexity of joint subcarrier and power allocation for multi-user OFDMA systems,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 583–596, Feb. 2014.

Jonathan Loo received his M.Sc. degree in Electronics (with Distinction) and the Ph.D. degree in Electronics and Communications from the University of Hertfordshire, Hertfordshire, U.K., in 1998 and 2003, respectively. Between 2003 and 2010, he was a Lecturer in Multimedia Communications with the School of Engineering and Design, Brunel University, Uxbridge, U.K. Between June 2010 and May 2017, he was an Associate Professor in Communication Networks at the School of Science and Technology, Middlesex University, London, U.K. From June 2017, he is a Chair Professor in Computing and Communication Engineering at the School of Computing and Engineering, University of West London, United Kingdom. His research interests include information centric networking, cloud computing, wireless/mobile networks and protocols, network security, wireless communications, IoT/cyber-physical systems, and embedded systems. He has successfully graduated 18 Ph.D. students as their principal supervisor, and has co-authored more than 240 journal and conference papers in the aforementioned specialized areas. Dr. Loo has been an Associate Editor for Wiley International Journal of Communication Systems since 2011. He was the Lead Editor of the book entitled “Mobile Ad Hoc Networks: Current Status and Future Trends” (CRC Press, November 2011).
Teong Chee Chuah received the B.Eng. degree (ﬁrst-class honors) in electrical and electronic engineering and the Ph.D. degree in digital communications from Newcastle University, UK, in 1999 and 2002, respectively. Since 2003, he has been with the Faculty of Engineering, Multimedia University, Malaysia. His current research interests include signal processing and optimization algorithms for wireless and wired xDSL broadband access networks.

Ying Loong Lee (S’13 – M’17) received the B.Eng. (Hons) degree in electronics majoring in telecommunications and the Ph.D. degree in wireless communications from Multimedia University, Cyberjaya, Selangor, Malaysia, in 2012 and 2017, respectively.
He was a short-term student intern in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National Chiao Tung University in 2015. He is currently working as a Research Ofﬁcer at Multimedia University. His current research interests fall in the areas of 5G wireless communications which include network slicing, resource management and load balancing for heterogeneous cellular networks and cloud radio access networks. Dr. Lee received the Yayasan Universiti Multimedia Postgraduate Scholarship in 2012, the Fundamental Research Grant Scheme Scholarship in 2015, the International Teletrafﬁc Congress Student Travel Grant Award in 2016, and the Multimedia University Best Thesis Award for Ph.D. in engineering in 2017.

Li-Chun Wang (M’96 – SM’06 – F’11) received Ph.D. degree from the Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, in 1996. From 1996 to 2000, he was with AT&T Laboratories, where he was a Senior Technical Staff Member in the Wireless Communications Research Department. Since August 2000, he has joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering of National Chiao Tung University in Taiwan and is jointly appointed by Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering of the same university. Dr. Wang was elected to the IEEE Fellow in 2011 for his contributions to cellular architectures and radio resource management in wireless networks. He won the Distinguished Research Award of National Science Council, Taiwan (2012). He was the co-recipients of IEEE Communications Society AsiaPaciﬁc Board Best Award (2015), Y. Z. Hsu Scientiﬁc Paper Award (2013), and IEEE Jack Neubauer Best Paper Award (1997). His current research interests are in the areas of software-deﬁned mobile networks, heterogeneous networks, and data-driven intelligent wireless communications. He holds 19 US patents, and have published over 200 journal and conference papers, and co-edited a book, “Key Technologies for 5G Wireless Systems,” (Cambridge University Press 2017).

1536-1276 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

