Original article

A general map matching
algorithm for transport telematics
applications
Mohammed A. Quddus Æ Washington Yotto Ochieng Æ Lin Zhao Æ Robert B. Noland

on a research and development project to create and
demonstrate the capabilities of an accurate, reliable and
cost-effective real time-data collection device, the vehicle
performance and emissions monitoring system (VPEMS).
The VPEMS will be fitted on vehicles to monitor vehicle
and driver performance and the level of emissions and
pollutant concentrations.
The navigation function of the VPEMS is responsible for
the derivation of all spatial, temporal and spatio-temporal
data of the vehicle including location in three-dimensional
space, time, slope, speed and acceleration. The required
navigation performance (RNP) that needs to be achieved
in built-up areas, where the impact of pollution from
traffic is most serious, means that the navigation function
cannot be supported by the global positioning system
(GPS) alone. One possible solution is the integrated use of
data from GPS with dead reckoning (DR) and map
matching (MM). An extended Kalman filter (EKF) has
been developed for the integration of GPS with dead
reckoning sensor data (Zhao et al. 2002). This paper reKeywords GPS Æ Map-matching Æ Land vehicle
ports on the linking of the EKF with a new map matching
navigation Æ Optimal estimation Æ Transport telematics
algorithm to accurately locate a vehicle on a given road
segment.
Positioning sensors such as GPS using the basic navigation
observable (pseudorange) or even the integrated GPS/DR
system employing EKF algorithms do not always provide
the location of a vehicle on a given road segment with the
Introduction
required level of accuracy. This is due to geometric constraints and/or error sources such as the atmosphere
Systems for monitoring and tracking vehicle movement
offer many opportunities for the management of transport (Zhao et al. 2002). The availability of higher accuracy
systems. The data collected from such systems also have digital spatial road network data should make it possible
to account for this and enable the actual vehicle position
the potential to provide a fuller understanding of the
on a given road to be estimated with a higher level of
behaviour of travellers and the consequences of that
accuracy. This technique is known as map matching
behaviour both on the transport system and external
effects, such as emissions of pollutants. This paper reports (MM). A formal definition of MM can be found in
Bernstein and Kornhauser (1996), White et al. (2000) and
Greenfeld (2002). The most complex algorithm is the
general MM algorithm that does not assume any knowlReceived: 4 June 2003 / Accepted: 21 August 2003
edge or any other information regarding the expected
Published online: 19 September 2003
location of the vehicle.
ª Springer-Verlag 2003
The objective of this paper is to describe the limitations of
existing MM algorithms and describe a general algorithm,
M.A. Quddus Æ W.Y. Ochieng (&) Æ L. Zhao Æ R.B. Noland
which is essential for the VPEMS project and other teleHead of Engineering Geomatics Group, Department of Civil and
matics applications. The proposed MM algorithm uses the
Environmental Engineering, Imperial College, London SW7 2BU, UK
output of the GPS/DR EKF algorithm. Its performance has
E-mail: w.ochieng@ic.ac.uk
been validated using data from a representative built-up
Tel.: +44-207-5946104
environment (the Greater London area).
Fax: +44-207-5946102
Abstract This paper describes a map-matching
algorithm designed to support the navigational
functions of a real-time vehicle performance and
emissions monitoring system currently under
development, and other transport telematics
applications. The algorithm is used together with the
outputs of an extended Kalman filter formulation for
the integration of GPS and dead reckoning data, and
a spatial digital database of the road network, to
provide continuous, accurate and reliable vehicle
location on a given road segment. This is
irrespective of the constraints of the operational
environment, thus alleviating outage and accuracy
problems associated with the use of stand-alone
location sensors. The map-matching algorithm has
been tested using real field data and has been found
to be superior to existing algorithms, particularly in
how it performs at road intersections.

DOI 10.1007/s10291-003-0069-z

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

157

Original article

Bernstein and Kornhauser (1996) describe several algorithms (or parts of algorithms) for matching an estimated
position to a network representation of the street system.
Two things are apparent from this study. First, it is clear
Map-matching (MM) procedures vary from those using
that this is a complex and fairly difficult task. Point-tosimple search techniques (Kim et al. 1996), to those using point and curve-to-point matching are unlikely to work
more complex mathematical techniques such as Kalman very well, especially when there are errors in the position
filters (Tanaka et al. 1990). A number of different algoand/or errors in the network representation. Hence, other,
rithms have been proposed for MM for different applica- more complicated algorithms must often be used. Second,
tions, each of which has advantages and disadvantages
though a number of different algorithms can be used, it
(Table 1). Some of these are reviewed below.
seems clear that it is both important to perform some kind

Existing literature
on map matching

Table 1
Summary of literature
Author (s), year

Algorithm

Procedures

Bernstein and Kornhauser (1996) Map matching as a search prob- Map the GPS tick to the ’closest’
Kim et al. (1996)
lem or point-to-point matching
node or shape point in the network
White et al. (2000)

Bernstein and Kornhauser (1996) Point-to-curve matching
White et al. (2000)
Taylor et al. (2001)
White et al. (2000)

Point-to-curve matching with
heading

Bernstein and Kornhauser (1996) Curve-to-curve matching
White et al. (2000)
Taylor et al. (2001)

Bernstein and Kornhauser (1996) Improving point-to-curve
White et al. (2000)
matching

Bernstein and Kornhauser (1996) Improving curve-to-curve
White et al. (2000)
matching

158

Krakiwsky et al. (1988)
Scott and Drane (1994)
Jo et al. (1996)

Map matching as a statistical
estimation

Greenfeld (2002)

Similarity criteria by weighting
system

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

Map the GPS tick to the ’closest’
arc in the network (minimum
distance from the point to the
curve)

Comments/disadvantages
(a) Only geometric information
(b) Never makes use of
’historical’ information
(c) Very sensitive to the way in
which the network was
digitized. That is, other things
being equal, arcs with more
shape points are more likely to
be properly matched
(a) Only geometric information
(b) Lack of the use of historical
information and hence sometimes assigns the incorrect link
(c) Quite unstable
(a) Better algorithm than pointto-curve matching
(b) GPS heading is sometimes
very inaccurate especially
when the vehicle speed is
zero or very low. Therefore,
incorrect matching can occur
(a) Geometric information
(b) Quite sensitive to outliers
(c) Sometimes yield unexpected
and undesirable results

Same as point-to-curve matching
algorithm except that it makes
use of the heading information.
If heading of the current GPS tick
is not comparable to the heading
of the arc, then the arc is dis
carded.
Match arcs defined by a series of
GPS point positions with arcs
defined by a set of points that
define partial road center-lines.
One method used for matching
two curves (arcs) is to use the
distance between them.
Given a known initial point, the Both geometric and topological
information are used. But quite
topology of the network makes
sensitive to the threshold that is
it possible to reduce the set of
likely arcs dramatically
used. One bad match can lead to
a sequence of bad matches
Very complex to implement and
Topological information of the
network is used with curve-toa real world experiment does
not consistently out perform
curve matching
other algorithms
In this approach, one considers a It is particularly elegant when the
sequence of points and attempts model describing the ‘physics of
to fit a curve to them. This curve motion’ is simple, e.g. moveis constrained to lie on the net- ment is only possible along a
straight line. Unfortunately, in
work
most practical applications, the
physics of motion is defined by
the network. This makes it quite
difficult to model
Topological analysis of road net- (a) Much more likely to be
work
simple and correct
(b) But sometimes assigns
incorrect links especially at
intersections
(c) Determination of vehicle
position is not robust

Original article

of curve-to-curve matching and to incorporate topological
information in the algorithm. Bernstein and Kornhauser
conclude that the more attention that is given to the
topological information, the better the algorithm performs.
White et al. (2000) describe several algorithms (or parts of
algorithms) for matching an estimated position to a network representation of the street system and attempt to
evaluate four of them. Because most route changes occur at
intersections, their study suggests that particular attention
needs to be paid to the problems that arise at intersections.
The discussion focuses on urban routes because most
algorithms appear to work well on highways. However,
they recommend that the algorithms need to be evaluated
on a wider array of routes, especially in urban areas. The
limited number and variety of routes considered in their
study preclude general conclusions from being made.
Taylor et al. (2001) propose a novel method of map
matching using differential GPS and height aiding, referred to as the road reduction filter (RRF) algorithm. The
general approach used is to improve the accuracy of the
computed position of a vehicle via differential corrections
and height aiding. The simple procedure used allows
identification of all possible candidates for the correct road
while systematically removing the wrong ones. The RRF
algorithm is improved using road centre-line network
connectivity. The method was developed to deal with
errors introduced by GPS selective availability (S/A),
which was subsequently turned off in May 2000 (Ochieng
and Sauer 2001). Its benefits are still to be assessed in the
S/A-free environment.
Greenfeld (2002) reviews several approaches for solving
the map matching problem and proposes a weighted
topological algorithm. The algorithm is based on assessing
the similarity between the characteristics of the street
network and the positioning pattern of the user. The
algorithm seems to work well even with relatively inferior
or bouncy GPS data. Tests show that the procedure computes correct matches virtually everywhere. However, their
study suggests that additional research is required to verify
the accurate performance of the algorithm and to make an
accurate position determination on a given road segment.
It is clear from the existing literature that a key component
of any MM algorithm is to identify the correct link among
the candidate links because one bad match can lead to a
sequence of bad matches. The literature review has also
revealed that particular attention has to be paid to topological aspects of the road network, matching processes at
intersections and algorithm validation in complex route
structure environments, such as in built-up urban areas.

Fig. 1
Incorrect match without the vehicle heading information at junction

Fig. 2
Random GPS/DR points when the vehicle is stationary

In Fig. 1, the points P1 to P20 represent the GPS/DR
positions of a vehicle travelling on a sample network. It is
relatively easy in this case to determine that the vehicle
path is represented by the links 1–2–3–4. Applying the
Greenfeld (2002) algorithm, or any other algorithm
explained in the above section, it is found that these points
correctly match on the link until P10. However, at point
P11, it selects link-5 as a correct link because the orientation of the GPS line between P11 and P12 is similar to link5. The reason why the algorithm assigns an incorrect link
is that it has not taken into account any heading information of the vehicle at P11. There are many cases similar
to this example. GPS/DR headings are fairly accurate and
could be used to provide additional information in facilitating a correct identification of the link.
It is also possible to obtain GPS/DR positions as shown in
Fig. 2. Between points P9 and P27, the vehicle is stationary
for about 18 s. The various points in between P9 and P27
Some limitations of existing
reflect the error in GPS position determination. It is
obvious that it would not be possible to identify the cormap-matching algorithms
rect link either using the algorithm proposed by Greenfeld
(2002) or any of the other map-matching procedures
Most of the limitations of the existing algorithms have
been explained in White et al (2000) and Greenfeld (2002). described in the literature review section. One way to
overcome this problem is to consider speed information
However, other additional limitations that should be
addressed can be easily identified. Examples of these are from GPS/DR and assume a single position fix when the
vehicle is stationary (i.e. zero speed).
illustrated in Figs. 1 and 2.

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

159

Original article

Another limitation of existing MM algorithms is associated
with the determination of the actual vehicle position on
the selected link. Most algorithms adopt a simple perpendicular projection of the position, as established by the
positioning sensor, onto the selected link, and ignore the
numerous errors associated with the positioning sensors
and the spatial road network mapping data. Scott and
Drane (1994) looked at this issue and used an optimal map
estimate method rather than perpendicular mapping,
which is also referred to as the nearest point (NP)
estimator (see Table 1 for limitations).
To overcome these limitations, a general MM algorithm is
proposed in this paper and described in the next section.

Description of the map-matching
algorithm

assumed to be a node. Each line and node is associated
with a set of identifying attributes. The attributes of the
node are the x- and y-coordinates that identify the spatial
location of the node. A node with the same x- and
y-coordinates has the same identification number. The
attributes of each link are determined from the nodes
within the link (i.e. start node and end node). Therefore,
connectivity information of links within a given network is
derived for input to the MM algorithm. The output of the
GPS/DR EKF algorithm used as an input to the MM process includes information on coordinates (eastings and
northings), speed, heading and the corresponding covariances. The MM process is described in detail below.
Map-matching process
The MM process is shown diagrammatically in Fig. 3. The
three data sources described above are the link and node
data and the positioning data. The process is initiated with
nodal matching to identify a correct link (among all the
links connected with the closest node to the GPS/DR
point) and the determinations of the physical location of
the GPS/DR point on that link. The next step analyses
whether the next GPS/DR point can be matched to the link
identified at the previous step and then determines its
physical location on the link. It is vital to carry out the first
step carefully and reliably, as there could potentially be
many candidate links.

The MM algorithm analysed in this paper seeks to correct
for some of the deficiencies of other methods as previously
described. The basic characteristics of the algorithm include the use of output from the GPS/DR EKF algorithm
developed by Zhao et al. (2002), including position,
velocity and time. Information on the vehicle trajectory is
used to avoid sudden switching of mapped locations between unconnected road links. The topological aspects of
the road network and GPS/DR heading and speed information allow improvements in performance of the algoSelecting the correct link among candidate links
rithm, especially at intersections. In addition, the physical
location of the vehicle on the selected link is determined The most difficult task of any MM algorithm is to select the
correct link among the candidate links. This will occur at
from the weighted averages of the two-state determinations. The weighting factors are determined empirically, as
described further below. Finally, the errors associated with
the bearing of the link (due to the map resolution and
curvature of the link) and positioning sensors are considered to determine the physical location of the vehicle on
the link. The details of the algorithm are described below
by first describing and defining the data inputs, followed
by a description of the map-matching process, and a
procedure for identifying data outliers.
Definition of data inputs
There are several ways to represent digital spatial road
network data. The planar model is currently one of the
most commonly accepted models because of its high efficiency and low complexity. In the planar model, as described by White et al (2000) and Greenfeld (2002),
network representation (N) of a street system (N) consists
of a set of curves in R2, each of which is called an arc. Each
arc A, which is a single representation of the road, can be
completely described by a fixed series of points A0, A1, ...,
AnA, each of which is in R2. Those points are divided into
nodes and shape points. The endpoints (i.e. A0 and AnA) of
the arc A are referred to as nodes whereas the other points
(i.e. A1, A2, ..., AnA)1) are referred to as shape points.
Arcs without shape points are referred to as lines and arcs
with shape points are referred to as polylines. Each polyline consists of a series of lines depending on the number
of shape points within the arc. Each line is assumed to be
Fig. 3
piece-wise linear. For simplicity, each shape point is
Diagrammatic representation of map-matching algorithm
160

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

Original article

junctions in a network. Based on the various similarity
criteria between the derived GPS/DR point and the network topology at a junction, a weighting system can be
used to select the correct arc as proposed by Greenfeld
(2002). The criteria used in the Greenfeld algorithm are the
similarity in orientation (i.e. the degree of parallelism
between the line formed by two consecutive GPS points
and the street network arc), proximity of the point to the
street arc and the size of the intersecting angle between the
GPS-derived line and the street arc. The weighting scheme
evaluates several candidate arcs for a correct match by
computing a likelihood score based on these criteria.
Greenfeld (2002) determined that similarity in orientation
is more important than proximity, but this can be adjusted
based upon the weights assigned to each criterion.
This same procedure is used in the algorithm derived here.
To improve the performance of the algorithm, the calibrated DR heading is used instead of the GPS-derived line
as an input. In addition, the position of the GPS/DR point
relative to its closest network node is considered and
vehicle speed information is also taken into account. Different weighting factors are used to control for the
importance of each of these criterion in determining the
best map-matching procedure. Each procedure is described in turn in the following sections.
Weighting for vehicle heading and bearing of the link
Suppose the algorithm selected the vehicle position for
GPS/DR points P1, P2 and P3 on link 1 (see Fig. 4). Now the
problem is to identify the next link using information from
point P4. Because the current position of the vehicle is on
link 1, candidate links for point P4 are links 2, 3 and 4. To
select the correct link, a weighting scheme is applied. The
angle b, provided by GPS/DR, is the heading of the vehicle
at point P4 measured relative to a northerly direction. This
information provides a good indicator of the probable
direction of the vehicle at this point. The heading of the
link (b’) is then determined from the spatial map data
(in this case, 90 for link 4, 0 for link 2 and 180 for link
3). The difference between the GPS/DR derived heading
(b) and the spatially derived heading (b¢) is Db and is used
to formulate the weighting scheme as given below.

Fig. 4
Similarity in vehicle heading and bearing of the link

WSH ¼ AH cos ðDb0 Þ

ð1Þ

where:
Db=b)b¢
Db¢=Db, if )180 £ Db £ 180
Db¢=360)Db, if Db>180
Db¢=360+Db, if Db<)180
WSH is the weighting score for vehicle heading and orientation of the link, AH (>0) is the weighting parameter for
WSH and its value can be obtained from Eq. (7), described
below.
The lower the value of Db’ the higher the probability of the
candidate link being the correct link, i.e. as the value of Db’
increases the value of WSH decreases, as defined by the
use of the cosine function. Moreover, the cosine function
allows negative weights if Db’ is greater than 90.
Weighting for proximity of a point to a link
Two types of weighting scores are used for the proximity
test. The first is based on the perpendicular distance from
the GPS/DR point to the link.
Suppose P(x3, y3) is the GPS/DR point and AB is a link (see
Fig. 5), then the perpendicular distance from this point to
the link is
D¼

x3 ðy1  y2 Þ  y3 ðx1  x2 Þ þ ðx1 y2  x2 y1 Þ
qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
ðx1  x2 Þ2 þ ðy1  y2 Þ2

ð2Þ

As perpendicular distance (D) decreases, proximity increases, therefore, the weighting score for perpendicular
distance is defined as,
WSPD ¼ AP =D

ð3Þ

where WSPD is the score for proximity of the point to the
street segment, D (>0) is the perpendicular distance from
the GPS/DR point to the road segment, and AP (>0) is the
weighting parameter that controls the value of WSPD. Any
value of AP can be taken to determine WSPD.
The smaller the perpendicular distance the higher the
score, i.e. if the point P is close to the link i, then there is a
greater probability that the link is the correct link.
Proximity can also be determined by whether the line
between two consecutive GPS/DR points [i.e. P(xi)1,
yi)1)and P(xi, yi)] and link i physically intersect. The
proximity between these two lines is measured by their

Fig. 5
Perpendicular distance

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

161

Original article

Fig. 6
Location of the point relative to the link

intersecting angle, h (acute angle). Smaller intersecting
angles lead to closer proximity. If these two lines do not
physically intersect, then the score is taken as zero. The
weighting score for this proximity is
WSPI ¼ AP cos ðhÞ

ð4Þ

where WSPI is the score for an intersection if an
intersection exists, AP is as previously defined.
Weighting score for the position of the point
relative to the link
In Fig. 6, P(xi, yi) is a GPS/DR position and the variables a1,
a2, a3 and a4 define the relative location of this point to links
1, 2, 3 and 4, respectively. Because this point can easily map
onto either link 2 or 3, the weighting score must be higher
for those links than the other links, i.e. the larger the angle,
the lower the probability that the link is a correct match.
This may not be the case under conditions with multiple
paths such as an intersection approach. However, the
algorithm also uses weights for the vehicle-heading information, which would provide the information to deal with
these cases. Therefore, the following weighting score of,
WSRP ¼ ARP cos ðaÞ

ð5Þ

where WSRP is the weighting score for the position of GPS/
DR relative to link, a ( £ 180) is the angle between the
candidate link and the line through the nearest node and
point and ARP (>0) is the weighting parameter for WSRP
and its value can be obtained from Eq. (7).
Total weighting scores (TWS)
The total weighting score can then be obtained by summing up the individual scores. Therefore, the total
weighting score (TWS) is defined as follows:
TWS ¼ WSH þ ðWSPD þ WSPI Þ þ WSRP

ð6Þ

By selecting different values for the weighting parameters,
the weight assigned can be carefully controlled. Detailed
examinations of field data suggest that the weighting score
for heading (WSH) should be given more importance than
that of relative position (WSRP). One of the reasons is that
the heading information used in this study is quite stable
as a result of the use of integrated GPS/DR system with an
EKF algorithm. Furthermore, the weighting score for relative position (WSRP) should be given more importance
162

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

Fig. 7
A specific geometric configuration with GPS/DR position fixes

than that of proximity (WSPD+WSPI). Therefore, the following formulation is proposed to select the value of the
weighting parameters.

AH ¼ aAP
ð7Þ
ARP ¼ bAP
where a and b are the weighting factors and b>a>1. The
magnitude of a and b depends on the a priori knowledge of
the statistical performance of the sensors and the topology
of the network. Some preliminary applications of the
algorithm with real field GPS/DR positioning data on a
representative built-up environment is also necessary to
fix the value of a and b. After fixing the value of a and b,
any positive value of AP will provide good results. The
value of TWS is then calculated for all the candidate links.
The link that provides the highest score is taken as the
correct link for that GPS/DR point.
Weighting results with a typical geometric configuration
The weighting scheme has been tested using a geometric
configuration that could potentially provide an incorrect
result. Figure 7 displays a simple geometric configuration
with data for a vehicle moving from link 1 to link 3. As can
be seen, there is one data point on link 2 that could
indicate that the path followed is from link 1 to link 2.
The values along the arrow symbols indicate the vehicle
heading at each position. The identification of the actual
link for the points P1 and P2 using the weighting scheme is
very straightforward and it is determined as link 1. The
next step is to identify the link for the point P3 which falls
on link 2. One could assume that the weighting scheme
gives link 2 the highest TWS for this point since it is exactly on that link. Using the parameters values a=5, AP=10,
b=2 and the weighting scores derived for each link,
Table 2 shows that link 3 has the highest TWS confirming
the robustness of the approach.
For further comparison, we also applied the weighting
scheme as described in Greenfeld (2002) to the above
configuration. Using the same parameters as Greenfeld of
CAZ=10, nAZ=5, CD=10, a=0.1, nD=1.2, Cl=10 and nAZ=10,
the total score (W) is calculated as:

Original article

Table 2
Calculation of TWS for the point P3 using proposed algorithm
Link

Variables

1

D1=40,
Db¢1=10,
h1=nil, a1=95
Db¢2=75,
D2=1,
h2=75 a2=0
Db¢3=10,
D3=40,
h3=nil, a2=85
Db¢4=100,
D4=2,
h4=nil, a4=175

2
3
4

TWS
47.74
45.53
51.23
)23.60

Table 3
Calculation of W for the point P3 using Greenfeld’s algorithm
Link

Variables

W

1
2
3
4

DAZ=25, D1=40
DAZ=60, D2=0
DAZ=25, D3=40
DAZ=155, D4=2

7.745 (Cl[0)
10.131
7.745 (Cl[0)
3.655 (Cl[0)

Fig. 8
Determination of vehicle position

Now the two measurements Pmap (Emap, Nmap) from the
digital map and CP (PES, PNS) from sensors are independent
(Fig. 9). Therefore, the optimal estimation of the vehicle
location on the link can be determined as a weighted
average of these two measurements as given below.
 2 
 2 
9
^ ¼ 2 rES 2 Emap þ 2 rmap2 PES =
E
rES þrmap
rES þrmap
 2 
 2 
ð11Þ
^ ¼ 2 rNS 2 Nmap þ 2 rmap2 PNS ;
N
r þr
r þr
NS

map

NS

map

^ is the estimated vehicle position (easting) on the
where E
^
vehicle position (northW ¼ CAZ : cosnAZ ðDAZ Þ þ ðCD  a:DnD Þ þ CI : cosnI ðDAZ Þ selected link, N is the estimated
ing) on the selected link, rmap2 is the variance of errors
2
associated with E ,, and rES
is the variance of errors
Results are shown in Table 3. The highest weight is given associated with E map
2
S, rNS is the variance of errors associated
to link 2 with an indeterminate selection between links 1 with N .As can be seen from Eq. (9), the error sources
S
and 3, demonstrating the advantages of the method
associated with the measurement of Emap are those assocideveloped here in these types of situations.
ated with the speed of the vehicle from the GPS/DR unit and
the bearing of the link (due to the digital map resolution and
Determination of the physical position
curvature of the link). All the variances associated with these
of the vehicle on the selected link
errors need to be considered to compute rmap2. However,
The bearing of the link and the vehicle speed (m) from the r 2can be obtained directly from the GPS/DR
unit.
integrated GPS/DR unit can be used to calculate the vehicle S
position on a link. Suppose Pt and Pt+1 represent the
Examining whether the vehicle
vehicle position on a link at time t and t+1, respectively
is still on the current link
(Fig. 8). The initial easting and northing of the vehicle at After assigning the vehicle position for the first two GPS/DR
t
point P is known. From the bearing of the link (i.e. h) and points on a correct link, the algorithm will examine whether
speed of the vehicle at Pt+1, the increment in easting and the vehicle is still on the link. Therefore, two conditions have
northing can be obtained as follows:
been introduced to test this criterion. They are:

DEi ¼ ðv  1Þ sin h
ð8Þ – The difference between the bearings of the two conDNi ¼ ðv  1Þ cos h
secutive GPS/DR lines [i.e. lines between P(xi, yi)and
P(x
i+1, yi+1) and P(xi+2, yi+2)] that is greater than 45.
Therefore, the position of the vehicle at point Pt+1 can be – The difference between the heading of the two conseccalculated as follows:
utive GPS/DR points is greater than 45 and the alpha

(a) is greater than 90.
Eiþ1 ¼ Ei þ DEi
ð9Þ
Niþ1 ¼ Ni þ DNi
If any of the above conditions are true, then the algorithm
assumes that the vehicle is approaching an intersection
The other method for determining position is from
the GPS/DR positioning sensor (Fig. 8). Suppose the
GPS/DR unit locates the vehicle at point PS with easting,
ES and northing, NS. The projected easting (PES)
and northing (PNS) on the link can be obtained as
follows:
9
S ðy2 y1 Þþðy2 y1 Þðx1 y2 x2 y1 Þ =
PES ¼ ðx2 x1 Þ½ES ðx2 xð1xÞþN
2
2
2 x1 Þ þðy2 y1 Þ
ð10Þ
PNS ¼ ðy2 y1 Þ½ES ðx2 x1 ÞþNS ðy22 y1 Þðx22x1 Þðx1 y2 x2 y1 Þ ;
ðx2 x1 Þ þðy2 y1 Þ

Fig. 9
Optimal estimate of vehicle position on the link

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

163

Original article

and initializes the map-matching process. Otherwise, the
Algorithm testing
vehicle is still on the previous link and the new location is
calculated using Eq. (11).
To test the performance of the MM algorithm, a comprehensive field test was carried out in Central London
Outlier identification
in January 2002. A test vehicle was equipped with a
With the integrated GPS/DR sensor, a significant number
navigation platform consisting of a 12-channel single
of outliers can be eliminated using well-known quality
frequency GPS receiver, a low-cost MEMS rate gyroscope
indicators. However, there is still the possibility of
and the interfaces required to connect to the vehicle
obtaining some outliers or spikes. This could happen at a
speed sensor (odometer) and back-up indicator. The
node or any other position. The point P(xi+1, yi+1) in
route in London was chosen carefully to have a good
Fig. 10, is identified as an outlier if Dd<45 (i.e. if there is a
mix of important spatial urban characteristics including
sudden change in two consecutive GPS/DR line bearings).
open spaces, urban canyons, tall buildings, tunnels,
This outlier may cause matching errors especially if Dd is
bridges and potential sources of electromagnetic interbigger and closer to arc DF. To avoid such matching erference. Data capture to sample the temporal variation in
rors, an outlier is finalized only after the next points have
the geometry of the GPS satellite constellation were also
been observed and analysed. A detailed description on
considered.
filtering outliers can be found in Greenfeld (2002).
The positioning results from the output of the integrated
(GPS/DR) system based on the EKF algorithm for a
Algorithm step by step
sample of the experimental route in Central London are
The detailed description of the map-matching algorithm
shown in Figs. 12 and 13. Each of the dots represents the
can be found in Fig. 11. The algorithm uses the following
vehicle position. Note that, in most cases, the points
steps to assign the vehicle on the correct link and to
deviated from the actual route taken due to positioning
determine its position on that link.
errors in the integrated system (although 100% of all
1. Find the closest node from the first GPS/DR point (i.e. position fixes were within 50 m of the road centre-line).
initial point).
The spatial network data used as reference had a reso2. Check whether the next point is an outlier. If not, then lution of 1.25 m. The arrow symbols in the figures show
select all the road segments that pass through the
the path followed by the vehicle on the network. As
closest node, otherwise take this point as the initial
already mentioned, the purpose of the MM algorithm
point and go to step 1.
developed here is twofold; first, to match each of the
3. Using the weighting formula [Eq. (6)], choose the cor- vehicle positions to a link (road segment) and, second, to
rect link. These two points (i.e. initial point and its next determine the vehicle location on that link.
point) should be matched to this link.
Figures 14 and 15 illustrate the results of the MM algo4. Determine the vehicle position on the correct link for rithm for the sample routes shown in Figs. 12 and 13,
each of the two points using Eq. (11).
respectively. Equation (6) was used to select the actual link
5. Check whether the next point is an outlier. If yes, then among a number of candidate links. After some groundgo to step-1 and take it as the initial point. If not, check work application of the algorithm with real field data, the
whether Db¢<45 and a £ 90. If yes, map this point on values of the weighting factors a and b are taken as 5 and 2,
the same link and determine its position [by Eq. (11)] respectively, whereas the value of the weighting parameter
and continue this process until the above conditions are AP is taken as 10. However, any positive value for AP (with
true, otherwise go to step 1.
a=5 and b=2) was found to provide very good results. The
6. Repeat step 5 until all points have been matched.
corresponding values of the weighting parameters AH and
ARP are 50 and 20, respectively [see Eq. (7)].
Figure 14 shows what appears to be an aberration in the
algorithm in the upper left corner. This was actually a test
of the MM algorithm where an intentional U-turn was
made. It was found that the algorithm was able to correctly
identify the link in this test as well.
In these two cases, almost 100% correct link identification
was achieved. However, it was found that the weighting
scheme to identify actual links is sensitive to the weighting
factors (a and b). More research, therefore, is needed to
obtain optimal values for the weighting parameters.
Equation (11) was then used to determine the actual
position of the vehicle on the selected link. A weighted
average (optimal estimation) of the two-state determination of the vehicle position was used, resulting in robust
physical location of the vehicle. Careful observation of the
results found that there are sudden losses of data just after
Fig. 10
some intersections in Fig. 15. The sensitivity of the
Outlier treatment

164

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

Original article

smaller links in urban networks. Future work will also test
the algorithm against the vehicle position as determined
from a higher accuracy GPS observable, the carrier phase.
weighting factors, as discussed above, and the very short The errors associated with map resolution, assumption of
length of the link (e.g. some are below 20 m) might be
linearity of the link, speed of the vehicle and positioning
responsible for such clusterings of vehicle locations.
sensors were all taken into account to estimate vehicle
Research is on going to look at this issue particularly with position on the link.

Fig. 11
Flow chart for map matching algorithm

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

165

Original article

Fig. 12
The position measurement from output of
GPS/DR EKF algorithm

external sensors to determine the actual location on a link.
The method has been found to be very efficient, particularly in difficult operational environments such as junctions and intersections. Because the errors associated with
the bearing (azimuth) of the link (due to map resolution
and the assumption that ’each arc is piece-wise linear’) and
positioning sensors are taken into account, the estimation
of the vehicle position on the selected link is found to be
quite robust.

References

Fig. 13
The position measurement from output of GPS/DR EKF algorithm

Conclusions
An integrated system employing GPS and low cost dead
reckoning devices, using an extended Kalman filter, has
been developed. The resulting vehicle position accuracy is
such that map matching is required to accurately locate a
vehicle on a given road segment (or link). In this paper, an
algorithm based on the topological analysis of the road
network, utilizing heading and speed information from the
EKF algorithm, has been developed. The approach adopts
a weighted average of two state determinations of the
vehicle position based on topological information and
166

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

Bernstein D, Kornhauser A (1996) An introduction to map
matching for personal navigation assistants. New Jersey TIDE
Center (http://www.njtude.org/reports/mapmatchintro.pdf)
Greenfeld JS (2002) Matching GPS observations to locations on a
digital map. Proceedings of the 81th Annual Meeting of the
Transportation Research Board, Washington, DC
Jo T, Haseyamai M, Kitajima H (1996) A map matching method
with the innovation of the Kalman filtering. IEICE Trans Fund
Electron Comm Computer Sci E79-A:1853–1855
Kim JS, Lee JH, Kang TH, Lee WY, Kim YG (1996) Node based
map matching algorithm for car navigation system. Proceedings of the 29th ISATA Symposium, Florence, vol 10,
pp 121–126
Krakiwsky EJ, Harris CB, Wong RVC (1988) A Kalman filter for
integrating dead reckoning, map matching and GPS positioning.
Proceedings of IEEE Position Location and Navigation
Symposium, pp 39–46
Ochieng WY, Sauer K (2001) Urban road transport navigation requirements: performance of the global positioning system
after selective availability. Transport Res C 10:171–187
Scott CA, Drane CR (1994) Increased accuracy of motor vehicle
position estimation by utilizing map data, vehicle dynamics
and other information sources. Proceedings of the Vehicle
Navigation and Information Systems Conferences, pp 585–590
Tanaka J, Hirano K, Itoh T, Nobuta H, Tsunoda S (1990)
Navigation system with map-matching method. Proceeding
of the SAE International Congress and Exposition,
pp 40–50

Original article

Fig. 14
Map matching results corresponding to
Fig. 12

Fig. 15
Map matching results corresponding to
Fig. 13

Taylor G, Blewitt G, Steup D, Corbett S, Car A (2001) Road
reduction filtering for GPS-GIS navigation. Proceedings of 3rd
AGILE Conference on Geographic Information Science, Helsinki, pp 114–120
White CE, Bernstein D, Kornhauser AL (2000) Some map
matching algorithms for personal navigation assistants. Transport Res C 8:91–108

Zhao L, Ochieng WY, Quddus MA, Noland RB (2002) An
extended Kalman filter algorithm for Integrating GPS and lowcost dead reckoning system data for vehicle performance and
emissions monitoring. J Navig 56:257–275

GPS Solutions (2003) 7:157–167

167

