2015 9th International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing

SDN Based Architecture for Clustered WSN
FLAUZAC Olivier, GONZALEZ Carlos, NOLOT Florent
University of Reims Champagne-Ardenne, Laboratory CReSTIC
Telephone: (+33) 3 26 91 32 15, Fax: (+33) 3 26 91 33 97
REIMS, FRANCE
Email: olivier.ﬂauzac@univ-reims.fr, carlos.gonzalez-santamaria@etudiant.univ-reims.fr, ﬂorent.nolot@univ-reims.fr

In this context, the SDN controller builds a global network
view based on the information received via OpenFlow.
Furthermore, the SDN controller can:

Abstract—In this paper, we propose to the concept of
software-deﬁned networking (SDN) in wireless sensor networks
(WSNs) with a structured and hierarchical management. We
argue that structured and hierarchical management using SDN
promises a solution to some inherent problems in WSN management. Furthermore, we propose a cluster based architecture
with multiple base stations as hosts for the SDN control
functions and as cluster heads in the same time. We also suggest
a general architecture for a software-deﬁned wireless sensor
network where the controller exchanges information with other
SDN domains. We call this new architecture: software-deﬁned
clustered sensor networks (SDCSN). In addition we highlight
some future directions and raise some important questions that
need to be investigated in future research in software-deﬁned
networks for ad-hoc and sensor networks.

•
•

A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is composed of several
wireless nodes (also called motes) able to collect data information from scenarios such as military and civilian surveillance, vital body functions, structural monitoring, weather
station, pollutant level, among others. Sensor nodes can be
deployed in the area of interest to sense and detect events and
communicate these to the Base Station. This area of study
perhaps is appropriate in inaccessible zones where human
intervention is impossible. Therefore the trustworthiness of
WSN in this scenario becomes of utmost importance. The
components of a sensor node are a power unit, processing
unit, sensing unit and communication unit. The processing
unit is responsible for communicating with the other sensor
nodes to collect signals captured and transmit them to the
network. But generally the sensors nodes have limited resources (energy), low processing power, low storage and low
communication bandwidth [6], [26]. Hence, they can only
transmit information within a limited transmission range
and with limited onboard processing capacity. In clustering
terms, the whole sensor network is divided into groups of
sensor nodes called clusters and in each cluster, a sensor
node is elected as cluster head (CH). There is an important
method for prolonging the lifetime of sensors networks
(WSNs). Several strategies of sensing modalities have been
studied to optimize the performance of sensor nodes [25].
The authors describe the beneﬁts and limitation of sensing
modalities that must be considered to facilitate deployment
of WSN. They also discuss the fact that the sensor nodes are
usually battery powered. To increase battery life, communication protocols to improve the power performance of sensor
nodes will be considered. When two or more interfering
nodes transmit at the same time during data collection, collision occurs. Because of this more energy is consumed during
the process and latency is increased. In [26] authors provide
a comparative study of all aggregation techniques to opti-

Keywords-software deﬁned network; SDN; wireless sensor
network; WSN; ad-hoc network

I. I NTRODUCTION
Software-Deﬁned Networking (SDN) has emerged as a
new paradigm for enabling innovation in networking research and development. SDN [1], [2] is actually attracting
signiﬁcant attention from both academia and industry, obtaining support from a large number of main industries such
as, Microsoft, Google, Facebook, HP, Deutsche Telekom,
Verizon, Cisco, IBM, and Samsung. A central software
program, called SDN controller, manages the overall network behavior. With SDN principles the control and data
planes are decoupled and network intelligence is logically
centralized. SDN controller can add, update, and delete ﬂow
entries, both reactively in response to packets and proactively
with predeﬁned rules. Moreover, SDN enables fast reaction
to security threats, granular trafﬁc ﬁltering, and dynamic
security policies deployment. The SDN architecture provides
a programmatic interface inside the controller. SDN allows
network control operations such as:
• run on top of one or multiple server platforms with
higher performance,
• use vendor independent hardware and an open operating system,
• are able to communicate with other operating systems
or control platforms using standard protocols.
SDN controller can use OpenFlow protocol to establish
connection with the switches. OpenFlow is one of the
protocols that can be used to control the network device.
978-1-4799-8873-0/11 $31.00 © 20115 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/IMIS.2015.52

perform network discovery, using the Link Layer Discovery Protocol (LLDP),
collect statistics about network trafﬁc using a special
ﬁeld in the ﬂow rules earlier installed by the controller.

342

mize energy efﬁciency and redundancy in WSN. They have
described the advantages and disadvantages of each data
aggregation method, using soft computing techniques. An
important characteristic of this work is the security measures
used by data aggregation techniques. If a cluster-head or the
aggregator node is compromised by a malicious attacker,
the data sent to the base station cannot be guaranteed. To
solve potential problems concerning the security of clusterhead, we take into account the Grid of Security concept
proposed by Flauzac et al. in [27]. Previous studies [3], [7],
[8], [9] in Software-Deﬁned Networking implementations
with wireless sensor nodes provide a better view of this
paradigm. However, nobody explains where the controller
could be placed in a WSN using Clustering mechanism.
From this situation, we can ask the following question: How
to design the Software Deﬁned Sensor Networks in a WSN?
For this reason, we propose architecture for the WSN and
Ad-Hoc network based in clusters. We call this architecture
Software Deﬁned for Clustered Sensor Networks (SDCSN).
This architecture can be deployed on a large scale for
monitoring and security applications. In this paper, we argue
a concept for software-deﬁned wireless sensors networks,
providing a perspective of the ﬁeld by different research
and also describing in detail the SDN WSN paradigm. The
paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we begins
by discussing the research on software deﬁned networking
and WSN. Section III provides an overview of SDCSN
and describes our implementation. Section IV describes the
domain interconnections with SDCSN. Finally, Section V
discusses research challenges and future directions.

Figure 1.

Architecture for Software-deﬁned wireless sensor networks [1]

Figure 2.

II. S TATE OF THE A RT

SDN based Sensing Architecture [7]

Gante et al. [8] presented base station architecture for
WSN based on SDN with a review of beneﬁts of this
technology. The authors mentioned the use of an SDN
controller as a base station in WSNs, but did not present
any detail about communication between sensor nodes. The
controller can determine the best routing, forwarding decisions and inserting these decisions into sensor nodes ﬂow
tables. In others words, the sensor nodes do not make routing
decisions, they only forward and drop packets according to
the rules set by the controller (base station).
In, [9] Contanzo et al. analyze the opportunities and challenges of SDN in IEEE 802.15.4 networks, implementing a
scenario called SDWN. The controller is executed into sink
nodes, and in order to communicate, each node must learn a
path (as convenient as possible) to reach the controller. The
controller periodically generates a beacon packet to send it to
the nodes. Also, the nodes store the list of nodes from which
they received a beacon packet. All discovered neighbors will
be linked frequently to the sink node using a packet called
a report packet.
Many solutions have been proposed by different authors
in the SDN and WSN ﬁeld, but to the best of our knowledge

An idea for managing WSN with SDN is proposed by Luo
et al. [3], (Fig. 1), with the concept of Software-Deﬁned
Wireless Sensor Networks SD-WSN. This study is based
on the idea that each sensor node supports OpenFlow, and
sensors should be able to recognize the ﬂow table’s entries.
This architecture proposes a separation between data and
control plane. The Sensor OpenFlow (SOF) is a communication protocol between the control plane and data plane.
The data plane contains sensor ﬂow packet forwarding, and
the control plane is a controller for performing routing and
QoS network control.
Another work by Zeng et al. in [7] has studied the
Evolution of Software-Deﬁned Sensor Networks, integrating
sensors nodes into cloud computing using a SaaS. This
model is named Sensing-as-a-service (Fig. 2) and combines
the sensing data with existing cloud services such as mashup
services. The controller is a sensor controller with SDN
functionalities and it is provided with a local database to
store sensed data. In this work the authors assume that every
sensor node is able to deliver packets to a sensor control
server.

343

there is no work about WSN in the SDN context with cluster
architecture. In this paper we propose Clustered Software
Deﬁned Sensor Networks. Clustering consists in organizing
the network into groups of nodes, in a hierarchical structure.
Each cluster is managed by a cluster head. To develop this
architecture we place the SDN controller in the cluster head.
Different clustering solutions have been proposed in the
literature. Some solutions proposed building 1-hop clusters
[11], [12], [13], [14]. In those solutions, each node is at a
most a distance of 1 from the cluster head, and the maximum
diameter of each cluster is 2. Other solutions build k-hops
clusters [15], [16], [24]. In k-hop cluster solutions, each node
can be located at a distance at most of k from the cluster
head and the maximum diameter of clusters is 2k.

SDNCH. A Domain is therefore composed of a SDNCH,
gateways and sensor nodes.
• SDN Cluster Head (SDNCH): it is the coordinator of
the domain.
• Gateway: is a bridge node between Sensor Nodes and
SDNCH.
• Sensor Nodes: are groups of nodes in domain together
with their gateway nodes.
In the base station architecture proposed by Gante et
al. [8], an SDN controller is combined with WSN and
the controller needs to know the topology of the entire
network. SDN has a higher potential to develop forwarding
decisions of SN based on the rules set generated by the
Controller, permitting a better cooperation among SDNCH
and SNs [3], [8], [9], [10]. Certainly, QoS could be an
efﬁcient way for sensor nodes to function in this architecture
using the concept of meters tables. This consists in meter
entries, deﬁning per-ﬂow meters [21]. The per-ﬂow meters
permit to Openﬂow to implement different QoS operations,
such as rate-limiting, and can be combined with per-port
queues to implement complex QoS frameworks (ex. DiffServ). Moreover, SDN controllers [8], can reduce the energy
consumption by different sensor nodes, making the best
routing decision and injecting these in the nodes ﬂow tables.
With the network management controlled by the SDN, the
routing decisions and policies have low convergence time in
comparison with routing protocols. To deploy this architecture, SDNCH not only has to manage the domain network.
But it also have to monitor and efﬁciently secure the domain
to prevent outside and inside attacks. The emergence of the
next generation Internet requires high level security. Many
works have studied network security using the SDN controller or installing security policies into OpenFlow switches,
either by implementing ﬁrewalls, IPS, or IDS [17], [18],
[19]. Our purpose is to achieve maximum synchronization of
SDNCH in a security perimeter enabling a granular control
over network access and continuous monitoring of SNs.
Moreover, this approach acts as a security guard on the
edge of domain to ensure the domain safety. For example, if
the service is forest ﬁre detection, SNs can identify threats
by smoke, ultraviolet and temperature sensors and achieve
optimal transmission to the SDNCH.

III. T HE S OFTWARE D EFINED C LUSTERED S ENSOR
N ETWORKS A RCHITECTURE
In this section, we introduce the concept of SDCSN
and explain the different technologies for the realization
of SDCSN. The WSN may contain hundreds or thousands
of sensor nodes. Normally, a large network cannot operate
efﬁciently without some organized structure. For this reason,
we propose to cluster the network and assume that each
cluster head is a controller. Each node can be in one of the
following states [5], [6], [24]: Simple Node (SN), Gateway
Node (GN) or Cluster Head (CH). In our approach, Cluster
Head (CH) in SDCSN architecture are called SDN Cluster
Head (SDNCH). Each cluster is called an SDN Domain. In
each SDN domain, the SDNCH [7] is in charge of managing the operation of the sensor nodes (Fig. 3). With this
clustering approach the collected information about the environment is processed on the domain by nodes and will be
routed to the SDNCH. Moreover, the controller is the most
powerful node on the cluster. By using the equal interaction
between SDNCH, it will have a full access to the switch
and the same ﬂows rules. Based in this approach, we can
set conﬁguration parameters, store data and aggregate the
collected information in the domain or sending information
to the sink or some other SDNCH. If a SDNCH is disabled,
the entire domain becomes inaccessible temporarily, based
on self-stabilizing clustering for WSNs [24] a new SDNCH
can be selected. Each sensor node exchanges information
with its neighbors or 2-hop neighbors. Under the assumption
of graph connectivity, information generated at one sensor
can reach the SDNCH by routing it through the network. The
gateway is engaged in aggregating and transmitting the data
from entire sensor node domains to the other domains. Thus,
when a gateway goes down, the communication between
domains will be disconnect and the associated sensors to
SDNCH are isolated.
The SDNCH plays the role of coordinator in every domain. Every SDNCH acts as a temporary base station within
its domain, and it is capable of communicating with other

IV. D OMAIN INTERCONNECTION IN SDCSN
By interconnecting all SDSN domains via border controllers (see Fig. 4) we intend to extend the concept of
SDSN. Each domain has its SDN controller which controls
all trafﬁc in its domain. In every domain SDNCH has its
own security policies and management strategy to distribute
routing functions and security rules to each border controller.
We adopt this architecture to guarantee the security with
the concept of a grid of security [27] embedded in each
controller to prevent attacks. When a sensor node need to
transmit the collected data to another domain, the ﬂow has

344







 
















  
    

Figure 3.

Data Communication Software-deﬁned wireless sensor networks

divided into several domains, where domain is managed by
a cluster head SDNCH. The sensor nodes transmit data to
their SDNCH, which transmits the aggregated data to the
base station. Sensor nodes can receive policies and routing
decisions from one or more SDNCH. The SDNCH acts
as the local base station for the particular domain. SDN
inter-domain routing is required to exchange data among
controllers. Each SDNCH builds a local network view, then
it may exchanges its local domain view with other SDNCH
through a WE-Bridge [22]. This WE-Bridge provides a
mechanism for different SDN administrative domains to
peer and collaborate with each other. In [23], the authors
propose a distributed SDN control plane, DISCO for WAN
and overlay networks. It relies on the domains, and each
controller is in charge of an SDN domain. Every neighbor
domain is capable of exchanging aggregated network-wide
information.

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 4.

Domain Software-deﬁned wireless sensor networks

to be forward to the security controller on the border of
domain SDNCH.
When a SDNCH fails, another controller can take control
to avoid system failures [20], increasing trustworthiness and
fault tolerance. The Openﬂow speciﬁcations in version 1.3
identify two modes of operations when multiple controllers
exist in the SDN: Equal interaction and Master/Slave interaction. These options are available in the Open Daylight
project [20], permitting to support a Cluster based High
Availability Model. Each SDNCH has a partial view of the
entire network, which can help to collaborate and exchange
information.
We analyze three options for connecting the SDN Domains: Equal and Master/Slave interaction, SDN Hierarchy
and Routing between SDNCH. For equal interaction [20],
all of the SDNCH will have a global view of the entire
network. The controllers exchange information among all
domains. In Master/Slave interaction one master controller
collects the data from multiple slaves. In this case each
and every SDNCH sends the information to one master
controller. In a hierarchical SDN Domain, the network is

V. E XPERIMENTATION
We are working to build a testbed in order to experiment
with our approach. We using many LXC containers connected to openvswitch. This virtual switch is controlled by
opendaylight.
VI. C ONCLUSION
This paper introduces a ﬁrst attempt to analyze the opportunities and challenges of applying the SDN Clustered
in WSN. We provide an overview of the SDN and WSN
approaches with some of the most important design and
implementation details of SDWN architecture. Existing research has focused on connectivity for sensor nodes and the
SDN controller. However, no one had proposed how to place
the controller in cluster architecture. A speciﬁc solution for

345

 























! 




















Figure 5.

     
  





Snapshot of the proposed architecture (SDCSN)

such scenario is an SDN cluster which we call SDCSN.
The beneﬁts of our approach is that the controller can not
only manage the network, also it can manage the security
of one SDN domain. We extend this solution to include
multiple controllers by interconnecting SDN domains via
border controllers, which leads us close to a secure model
for the WSN ad-hoc networks. The architecture proposed
in this article present a new method to deploy a distributed
security solution where the ﬂow trafﬁc between each sensor
nodes can be controlled in a collaborative manner by the
SDNCH.

[5] P. Azad and V. Sharma, Cluster Head Selection in Wireless
Sensor Networks under Fuzzy Environment, ISRN Sensor Networks, 2013
[6] M. Ba, O. Flauzac, R. Makhlouﬁ et al.: A Novel Aggregation
Approach Based on Cooperative Agents and Self-Stabilizing
Clustering for WSNs, The Seventh International Conference
on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service,
CTRQ 2014
[7] D. Zeng, T. Miyazaki, Song Guo et al., Evolution of SoftwareDeﬁned Sensor Networks, Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor Networks (MSN), 2013 IEEE Ninth International Conference,
2013, pp 410-413

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
[8] A. De Gante, M. Aslan and A. Matrawy, Smart wireless sensor
network management based on software-deﬁned networking,
Communications (QBSC), 2014 27th Biennial Symposium
2014, pp. 71-75

This work was developed with ﬁnancial support from
the Secretara Nacional de Ciencia, Tecnologa e Innovacin
(SENACYT) Panama.

[9] S. Costanzo, L. Galluccio, G. Morabito et al., Software Deﬁned Wireless Networks: Unbridling SDNs, Software Deﬁned
Networking (EWSDN), European Workshop 2012, pp.1-6

R EFERENCES
[1] B.A.A. Nunes, M. Mendonca, N. Xuan-Nam et al.: A Survey
of Software-Deﬁned Networking: Past, Present, and Future
of Programmable Networks, Communications Surveys and
Tutorials, IEEE, 2014, 16, (3), pp 1617-1634

[10] Y. Fan , V. Gondi, J.O. Hallstrom et al.: OpenFlow-based
load balancing for wireless mesh infrastructure, Consumer
Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), 2014
pp 444-449

[2] Open Networking Foundation, Software-deﬁned networking:
the new norm for networks, white paper, Apr. 2012

[11] N. Mitton, A. Busson, E. Fleury, Self-organization in large
scale ad hoc networks, in MED-HOC-NET, 2004

[3] T. Luo, H. Tan, T.Q.S. Quek, Sensor OpenFlow: Enabling
Software-Deﬁned Wireless Sensor Networks, Communications
Letters, IEEE, 2012, 16, (11), pp.1896-1899

[12] O. Flauzac, B.S. Haggar, F. Nolot, Self-stabilizing clustering
algorithm for ad hoc networks, ICWMC, 2009, pp 24-29

[4] B. Nunes, M. Santos, B. de Oliveira et al., Software deﬁned
networking enabled capacity sharing in usercentric network,
IEEE Communications Magazine, 2014, 52, (9), pp 28-36

[13] C. Johnen and L. Nguyen, Self-stabilizing construction of
bounded size clusters, ISPA, 2008, pp 4350

346

[14] C. Johnen and L. H. Nguyen, Robust self-stabilizing weightbased clustering algorithm, TCS, 2009, pp 581594
[15] N. Mitton, E. Fleury, I. Guerin Lassous et al., Selfstabilization
in self-organized multihop wireless networks, in ICDCSW,
2005, pp. 909915
[16] E. Caron, A. K. Datta, B. Depardon et al., A selfstabilizing
k-clustering algorithm for weighted graphs, JPDC, 2010, pp
11591173
[17] S. Son , S. Shin, V. Yegneswaran et al., Model checkinginvariant security properties in openﬂow, in Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2013, pp
1974-1979
[18] H. Hu, W. Han, G.J. Ahn et al., Building robust ﬁrewalls
for software-deﬁned networks, in Proceedings of the Third
Workshop on Hot Topics in Software Deﬁned Networking,
2014, pp 97102
[19] R. Jin and B. Wang, Malware detection for mobile devices
using softwaredeﬁned networking, in Proceedings of the Workshop of Research and Educational. pp. 81-88, 2013.
[20] Network Functions Virtualization (NFV), OpenDaylight,
http://www.opendaylight.org/, accessed November 2014
[21] OpenFlow Switch Speciﬁcation, Open Networking Foundation, http://www.opennetworking.org/, accessed November
2014
[22] P. Lin, B. Jun, Ch. Ze et al., WE-bridge: West-east bridge
for SDN inter-domain network peering, Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), IEEE Conference
2014, pp 111-112
[23] K. Phemius, M. Bouet, J. Leguay, DISCO: Distributed multidomain SDN controllers, Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS), 2014, pp 1-4
[24] M. Ba, O. Flauzac, B. S. Haggar et al, Self-stabilizing k-hops
clustering algorithm for wireless ad hoc networks, in: 7th ACM
ICUIMC (IMCOM), 2013, pp 138
[25] G. Owojaiye and Y. Sun, Focal design issues affecting the
deployment of wireless sensor networks for intelligent transport systems, Intelligent Transport Systems, IET, 2012, 6, (4),
pp 432-432
[26] H.R. Dhasian and P. Balasubramanian, Survey of data aggregation techniques using soft computing in wireless sensor
networks, Information Security, IET, 2013, 7, (4), pp 336-342
[27] O. Flauzac , F. Nolot, C. Rabat et al., Grid of security: A
new approach of the network security, in Proceedings Third
International Conference on Network and System Security,
2009 pp 6772

347

