Modeling and Forecasting Vehicular Traffic Flow
as a Seasonal ARIMA Process: Theoretical Basis
and Empirical Results
Billy M. Williams, M.ASCE1 and Lester A. Hoel, F.ASCE2
Abstract: This article presents the theoretical basis for modeling univariate traffic condition data streams as seasonal autoregressive
integrated moving average processes. This foundation rests on the Wold decomposition theorem and on the assertion that a one-week
lagged first seasonal difference applied to discrete interval traffic condition data will yield a weakly stationary transformation. Moreover,
empirical results using actual intelligent transportation system data are presented and found to be consistent with the theoretical hypothesis. Conclusions are given on the implications of these assertions and findings relative to ongoing intelligent transportation systems
research, deployment, and operations.
DOI: 10.1061/共ASCE兲0733-947X共2003兲129:6共664兲
CE Database subject headings: Traffic flow; Traffic models; Seasonal variations; Data analysis; Traffic management; Intelligent
transportation systems.

Introduction
Internationally, the transportation focus in developed nations has
shifted from the construction of physical system capacity to improving operational efficiency and integration. The infrastructure
deployed within this new focus is commonly called intelligent
transportation systems 共ITSs兲. Access to information about dynamic system conditions is essential to this effort. Consequently,
the final years of the 20th century saw the widespread instrumentation of surface transportation networks in the world’s metropolitan areas, and this effort continues unabated. The data provided
by these sensor systems are disseminated to travelers and support
modest control systems, such as freeway ramp metering. However, the dynamic system optimization potential inherent in realtime data remains largely untapped.
Accurate short-term prediction of system conditions is one of
the keys to optimizing transportation system operations. In the
absence of explicit forecasts, traveler information and transportation management systems simply react to the currently sensed
situation. In essence, this approach assumes that the current conditions provide the best estimate of the near-term conditions. This
is obviously a poor general assumption, especially for times when
traffic conditions are transitioning into or out of congestion.
This need for accurate system forecasts has motivated research
efforts in traffic condition prediction 共in most cases, traffic flow
1

Assistant Professor, Dept. of Civil Engineering, North Carolina State
Univ., Raleigh, NC 27695-7908.
2
L.A. Lacy Distinguished Professor of Engineering, Dept. of Civil
Engineering, Univ. of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22904-4742.
Note. Discussion open until April 1, 2004. Separate discussions must
be submitted for individual papers. To extend the closing date by one
month, a written request must be filed with the ASCE Managing Editor.
The manuscript for this paper was submitted for review and possible
publication on December 3, 2001; approved on September 27, 2002. This
paper is part of the Journal of Transportation Engineering, Vol. 129,
No. 6, November 1, 2003. ©ASCE, ISSN 0733-947X/2003/6664 – 672/$18.00.

prediction兲. The scope of research has been broad, from systemwide predictions of origin-destination matrices to single-point
forecasts of traffic flow.
The purpose of this paper is to present a case for acceptance of
a specific time series formulation—the seasonal autoregressive
moving average process—as the appropriate parametric model for
a specific type of ITS forecast: short-term traffic condition forecasts at a fixed location in the network, based only on previous
observations at the forecast location. In the balance of the paper,
this forecast type will be referred to as the univariate short-term
prediction problem.
Univariate short-term predictions are, of course, not the only
type of traffic condition forecasts that will be needed in nextgeneration ITS. For example, at sufficiently short discrete time
intervals, discrete approximations of continuum traffic flow models, such as Daganzo’s lagged cell-transmission model 共Daganzo
1999兲, are promising candidate prediction methods. However, accurate modeling and forecasting of fixed-point traffic data streams
are foundational and will provide the primary demand forecasts at
uncongested entry points to instrumented systems.
Univariate short-term predictions will also continue to be important for forecasting traffic condition data series that are averaged over time intervals with lengths above a certain threshold,
say for example 15 min. At longer discrete time intervals, a situation will eventually be reached where it is no longer possible to
theoretically establish and model stable correlation with other detection locations within the instrumented network. In such cases,
the most accurate forecasts will be univariate predictions even for
data locations interior to the network. Williams 共2001兲 provides
further discussion and analysis of multivariate traffic condition
forecasting approaches.

Short-Term Prediction Problem
Fixed-location roadway detection systems commonly provide
three basic traffic stream measurements: flow, speed, and lane
occupancy. Flow 共alternatively referred to as volume兲 is typically

664 / JOURNAL OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING © ASCE / NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2003

given as an equivalent flow rate in vehicles per hour. Speed is
typically given as the algebraic mean of the observed vehicle
speeds 共although the harmonic mean would be more appropriate
from a traffic flow theory perspective兲. Lane occupancy is a measure of traffic stream concentration and is the percentage of time
that the sensor is detecting vehicle presence, or, in other words,
the percentage of time that the sensor is ‘‘on.’’ The base discrete
time interval of the traffic condition data series varies from system to system, generally falling in the range of 20 s to 2 min. ITS
software systems usually create one or more archivable data series from the base series. These archivable data series are aggregated at longer intervals ranging from 1 min up to a quarter, half,
or full hour. Actual data-archiving practices vary widely from
system to system.
The univariate short-term prediction problem involves generating forecasts for one or more discrete time intervals into the
future based only on the previous observations. By way of formal
definition, let 兵 V t 其 be a discrete time series of vehicular traffic
flow rates at a specific detection station. The univariate short-term
traffic flow prediction problem is
V̂ t⫹k ⫽ f 共 V t ,V t⫺1 ,V t⫺2 ,... 兲 ,

k⫽1,2,3,...

(1)

where V̂ t⫹k is the prediction of V t⫹k computed at time t. The
prediction where k⫽1 is the single interval or one-step forecast.
Likewise, multiple interval forecasts are those where k⬎1.

Seasonal ARIMA Process
Time Series Notation
An understanding of time series differencing, time interval backshift, and associated notation is prerequisite to a basic understanding of the seasonal autoregressive integrated moving average
共ARIMA兲 process. Therefore, a brief presentation of these important concepts and conventions follows.
Differencing creates a transformed series that consists of the
differences between lagged series observations. The single lag
difference operator is often denoted by the symbol ⵜ. Using this
symbol, the first and second differences for an arbitrary time series 兵 X t 其 can be defined as
ⵜX t ⫽X t ⫺X t⫺1

(2a)

ⵜ 2 X t ⫽X t ⫺X t⫺1 ⫺ 共 X t⫺1 ⫺X t⫺2 兲 ⫽X t ⫺2X t⫺1 ⫹X t⫺2 (2b)
Differencing with the single lag operator ⵜ is sometimes
called ordinary differencing, with the superscript denoting the
order of ordinary differencing. Differencing can also be applied at
a seasonal lag. In this case, a subscript is employed to specify the
length of the seasonal cycle. For example, for a series with a
seasonal cycle of 12 intervals, the first seasonal difference would
be defined as ⵜ12X t ⫽X t ⫺X t⫺12 . Higher-order seasonal differencing can also be specified by using an integer superscript greater
than one in combination with the seasonal cycle subscript.
In ARIMA model expressions it is more common to see the
backshift operator B used to define the required differencing. The
backshift operator is defined by the expression
B j X t ⫽X t⫺ j

(3)

Using the backshift operator, the first difference can be written
as (1⫺B)X t ⫽X t ⫺X t⫺1 , the second difference as (1⫺B) 2 X t
⫽(1⫺2B⫹B 2 )X t ⫽X t ⫺2X t⫺1 ⫹X t⫺2 , and so on. In general expressions, the superscript d is used to denote the degree of ordinary differencing. In the same manner, seasonal differencing can

be specified by the expression (1⫺B S ) D X t , with S denoting the
length of the seasonal cycle and D denoting the order of seasonal
differencing.

Seasonal ARIMA Definition
A brief presentation of the ARIMA model form is given below.
For a more detailed discussion, the reader is referred to a comprehensive time series analysis text, such as Brockwell and Davis
共1996兲 or Fuller 共1996兲.
A time series 兵 X t 其 is a seasonal ARIMA ( p,d,q) ( P,D,Q) S
process with period S if d and D are nonnegative integers and if
the differenced series Y t ⫽(1⫺B) d (1⫺B s ) D X t is a stationary autoregressive moving average 共ARMA兲 process defined by the expression
␾ 共 B 兲 ⌽ 共 B s 兲 Y t ⫽␪ 共 B 兲 ⍜ 共 B s 兲 e t

(4)

where B⫽backshift operator defined by B X t ⫽X t⫺a ; ␾(z)⫽1
⫺␾ 1 z⫺¯⫺␾ p z p ,⌽(z)⫽1⫺⌽ 1 z⫺¯⫺⌽ P z P ; ␪(z)⫽1⫺␪ 1 z
⫺¯⫺␪ q z q ,⍜(z)⫽1⫺⍜ 1 z⫺¯⫺⍜ Q z Q ; e t is identically and
normally distributed with mean zero, variance ␴ 2 ; and
cov(e t ,e t⫺k )⫽0᭙k⫽0, that is, 兵 e t 其 ⬃WN(0,␴ 2 ).
The parameters p and P represent the nonseasonal and seasonal autoregressive polynomial order, respectively, and the parameters q and Q represent the nonseasonal and seasonal moving
average polynomial order, respectively. As discussed above, the
parameter d represents the order of normal differencing, and the
parameter D represents the order of seasonal differencing.
From a practical perspective, fitted seasonal ARIMA models
provide linear state transition equations that can be applied recursively to produce single and multiple interval forecasts. Furthermore, seasonal ARIMA models can be readily expressed in state
space form, thereby allowing adaptive Kalman filtering techniques to be employed to provide a self-tuning forecast model.
a

Theoretical Justification for Seasonal ARIMA
The theoretical justification for modeling univariate time series of
traffic flow data as seasonal ARIMA processes is founded in the
time series theorem known as the Wold decomposition, which
applies to discrete-time data series that are stationary about their
mean and variance. Therefore it is also necessary to support an
assertion that an appropriate seasonal difference will induce stationarity.

Wold Decomposition
The Wold decomposition is a fundamental time series analysis
theorem, which states that if 兵 X t 其 is a stationary time series, then
⬁

X t⫽

兺 ␺ j e t⫺ j ⫹V t

(5)

j⫽0

where ␺ 0 ⫽1 and 兺 ⬁j⫽0 ␺ 2j ⬍⬁; 兵 e t 其 ⬃WN(0,␴ 2 ); 兵 V t 其 and 兵 e t 其
are uncorrelated; e t ⫽limit of linear combinations of X s , s⭐t;
and V t is deterministic 共Brockwell and Davis 1996; Fuller 1996兲.
In practical terms, Wold’s theorem says that any stationary
time series can be decomposed into a deterministic series and a
stochastic series. Furthermore, the theorem states that the deterministic part can be exactly represented as a linear combination of
past values and that the stochastic part can be represented as a
moving average time series via the time-invariant linear filter ⌿
⫽ 兵 ␺ 0 ,␺ 1 ,... 其 .

JOURNAL OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING © ASCE / NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2003 / 665

level of traffic flow and the covariance between time-lagged traffic flow observations are strongly time dependent. The first difference of a traffic flow series is also clearly nonstationary. Let
兵 X t 其 be a traffic flow time series and 兵 Y t 其 ⫽ 兵 ⵜX t 其 . Under normal
conditions, we can know with a high degree of certainty when
peak and off-peak conditions will occur. Consequently, for the
time intervals t when traffic volumes are expected to be rising to
a peak, the expected value of Y t is greater than zero, or E 关 Y t 兴
⬎0. Likewise, for the time intervals t when traffic volumes are
expected to be falling from a peak, the expected value of Y t is less
than zero, or E 关 Y t 兴 ⬍0.
However, a one-week seasonal difference intuitively holds the
promise of yielding a stationary transformation for traffic condition data series. Traffic condition data in urban areas generally
exhibit a characteristic weekly pattern closely tied to work week
activities. Weekdays typically involve significant peaking in the
morning and the afternoon, and weekend days typically experience lower-level peaks, with a single midday peak in some cases.
For example, Fig. 1 shows two typical weeks, each at two freeway locations. The left side of Fig. 1 includes the traffic flow
profiles for 2 weeks at a detector location on the outer 共clockwise兲
loop in the southwest quadrant of the M25 orbital motorway
around London, and the right side of Fig. 1 includes traffic flow
profiles for two weeks at a detector location on northbound Interstate 75 共I-75兲 inside the northwest quadrant of the Interstate 285
共I-285兲 perimeter freeway in Atlanta.
Given this stability in weekly traffic flow patterns, it follows
that creating a series composed of the differences between traffic
condition observations and the observations one-week prior
should remove the predominant time dependencies in the mean
and variance. Okutani and Stephanedes 共1984兲 previously put
forth the assertion that a weekly seasonal difference of traffic
condition data will induce stationarity.
As stated above, the assertion that a weekly seasonal difference will yield a stationary transformation of discrete time traffic
condition data series, coupled with the Wold decomposition theorem, provides theoretical justification for the application of
ARIMA models. This theoretical foundation in turn supports the
hypothesis that properly fitted seasonal ARIMA models will provide accurate traffic condition forecasts. The next section presents
testing of this hypothesis through the empirical evaluation of seasonal ARIMA modeling of several freeway data sets.

Fig. 1. Typical weekly patterns for two freeways

This is in essence identical to the definition of an ARMA process. Therefore, if we can defensibly assume that traffic flow data
series can generally be made stationary through seasonal differencing, then the case is made that seasonal ARIMA is an appropriate parametric model.

Time Series Stationarity
As touched on above, the Wold decomposition applies to time
series that are stationary with respect to mean and variance. Stationarity with respect to mean and variance is referred to as weak
stationarity. Stochastic processes such as time series can also be
strictly stationary; this more restrictive condition is called strict or
strong stationarity. For a stochastic process to be strictly stationary, any two finite samples of the same size must have the same
joint distribution function. Strict stationarity is not an important
concept in time series analysis, and therefore when a time series
is said to be stationary, it is generally understood that this means
weakly stationary.
By way of formal definition, a time series 兵 X t 其 is said to be
weakly stationary 共stationary兲 if the following two conditions
hold:
1. Expected value of X t is same for all t; and
2. Covariance between any two observations in series is dependent only on lag between observations 共independent of t).
In practice, it is seldom possible to prove or assume strict
adherence to these two conditions. However, if the time dependencies in the expected values and covariances are small relative
to the nominal level of the series, the series may be close enough
to stationarity to be effectively modeled as an ARIMA process.
Therefore, sound ARIMA modeling strategy begins with selecting
the differencing scheme that will yield the most nearly stationary
transformation of the raw series.
Untransformed time series of vehicular traffic flow clearly do
not meet either of the conditions for stationarity. The expected

Empirical Results
Following a brief introduction to the analyzed data sets, the presentation of empirical results focuses first on correlation analysis
as a basis for assessing the stationarity of series transformations
using a first weekly difference. This is followed by a presentation
of the model-fitting results and a discussion of the heuristic
benchmarks used to assess the predictive performance of the fitted

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics—M25 Motorway Data
Data series 共1996兲
Development
September 1–October 18
Test
October 19–November 30

Series length
共number of observations兲

Missing values

Percent missing

Series mean 共vph兲

Mean absolute
one-step change

4,608

122

2.6

3,112

316

4,128

355

8.6

2,953

299

666 / JOURNAL OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING © ASCE / NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2003

forecasting by researchers at the Institute for Transport Studies at
the University of Leeds 共ITS-Leeds兲.
M25 has four travel lanes at the location of detector station
4762A. The modeled data represent total 15-min hourly flow rates
across all four lanes and cover the period from September 1
through November 30, 1996. Table 1 presents some descriptive
statistics on the M25 Motorway data including the number and
percentage of missing observations. Fig. 2 illustrates the location
of the M25 data.

Fig. 2. M25 data location

seasonal ARIMA models. The results section concludes with an
assessment of the model forecast accuracy.

The Data
Data from two freeway locations, one in the United States and
one in the United Kingdom, are used in this study. In addition to
representing different countries, the two data sets involve different freeway types and different detection technologies. As mentioned above in reference to Fig. 1, the U.K. data are from the
outer loop in the southwest quadrant of the M25 motorway
around London, a location representative of modern major urban
circumferential freeways. The U.S. data are from northbound I-75
inside the northwest quadrant of the I-285 perimeter freeway
around Atlanta, a location representative of a major urban radial
freeway. Traffic condition data on the M25 are gathered by the
Highway Agency’s Motorway Incident Detection and Automatic
Signaling 共MIDAS兲 system using paired inductive loops. The Atlanta I-75 data are collected by Georgia’s statewide advanced traffic management system, NaviGAtor, using the Autoscope video
detection technology. For both data sets, the modeling and forecasting were performed on traffic flow data aggregated at 15-min
discrete time intervals, with a portion of the data held out from
model estimation for the purpose of model testing and validation.
M25 Motorway
The Highways Agency provided the data on archival CD-ROM
media. The data include traffic condition observations at 1 min
discrete intervals. The initial seasonal ARIMA modeling research
using these data was performed on detector station 4762A, between the M3 and M23 interchanges, at a 15-min discrete data
aggregation 共Williams 1999兲. This was done to allow direct comparison with the results of published and ongoing modeling and

Interstate 75
The Georgia Department of Transportation provided 15-min archived traffic condition data from the NaviGAtor system. Data
from detector station 10048 were used in this study. At the location of detector station 10048, northbound I-75 has four regular
travel lanes and one high-occupancy vehicle 共HOV兲 lane. The
HOV lane is not physically separated from the regular lanes. The
modeled data represent average per-lane 15-min hourly flow rates
for the four regular travel lanes. Therefore the relative level of the
I-75 data differs from the M25 data by a factor of between three
and four.
The analyzed station 10048 data cover the period from November 1, 1998, through March 23, 1999. Table 2 presents some
descriptive statistics on the I-75 data, including the number and
percentage of missing observations, and Fig. 3 illustrates the location of the I-75 data.

Correlation Analysis
The most common method for assessing whether or not a data
series is stationary is to examine the sample autocorrelation function. For stationary series, the sample autocorrelation function
exhibits either exponential decay or an abrupt end to significant
correlation after a finite number of lags. As discussed above, traffic condition data series are clearly nonstationary. Examination of
the weekly patterns exhibited in Fig. 1 leads to an expectation that
the autocorrelations will be very strong at 1-day and 1-week lags
共96 and 672 intervals, respectively, for 15-min discrete interval
data兲. This expectation is clearly realized in the sample autocorrelation function plots for the development data sets of the two
freeway locations 共Fig. 4兲. The autocorrelation peaks occur at
even multiples of the 1-day lag of 96 intervals, and the peak
correlation rises at the 1-week lag of 672 intervals.
It was asserted above that a first seasonal difference at a oneweek lag should induce stationarity for traffic condition data series. This premise can be evaluated by examining the sample
autocorrelation plots for the differenced series. The sample autocorrelation functions for the 1-week differenced model development data are plotted in Fig. 5. The M25 plot more clearly demonstrates stationarity than the I-75 plot, but the I-75 development
data timeframe includes the weeks of the Thanksgiving, Christmas, and New Year’s holidays. The effect of these weeks on the
correlation structure of the development data sample is signifi-

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics—Interstate 75 Data
Data series 共1998 –1999兲
Development
November 1–January 14
Test
January 15–March 23

Series length
共number of observations兲

Missing values

Percent missing

Series mean 共vph兲

Mean absolute
one-step change

7,200

987

13.7

1,075

81

6,528

348

5.3

1,169

89

JOURNAL OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING © ASCE / NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2003 / 667

vealed that ARIMA (1,0,1)(0,1,1) S consistently emerges as the
preferred model, based on minimization of the Schwarz Bayesian
information criterion 共SBC兲. Although the model estimation procedure generally includes an estimate for a constant term, this
term is often not statistically significant and is small relative to
the nominal level of the observations. Therefore it is recommended that in most cases the constant term be omitted from the
forecast equations.
For this study the robust model identification and estimation
procedure was further applied to the I-75 station 10048 data, with
the results consistent with the previous findings. Table 3 presents
the SBC values for the three seasonal models with the lowest
SBC values for each data set; and the final parameters derived
from the development data sets are presented in Table 4. Fitted
ARIMA models can be rearranged into recursive one-step predictors using previous one-step prediction errors to approximate the
series innovations. The corresponding prediction equation for the
ARIMA (1,0,1)(0,1,1) 672 models is
V̂ t⫹1 ⫽V t⫺671⫹␾ 1 共 V t ⫺V t⫺672兲 ⫺␪ 1 共 V t ⫺V̂ t 兲 ⫺⍜ 1 共 V t⫺671
Fig. 3. I-75 data location

⫺V̂ t⫺671兲 ⫹␪ 1 ⍜ 1 共 V t⫺672⫺V̂ t⫺672兲

(6)

cant. The sample autocorrelation function plot of the 1-week differenced test data, Fig. 6, exhibits a more clearly stationary pattern.

Eq. 共6兲 provides a simple linear recursive estimator. The test
data forecasts presented in the next section were calculated by
implementing Eq. 共6兲 in Microsoft Excel spreadsheets with the
parameters given in Table 4.

Fitted Models

Heuristic Forecasting Benchmarks

The M25 data were used in previous research aimed at investigating the appropriateness of seasonal ARIMA for univariate traffic flow prediction 共Williams 1999兲. This earlier research included
development of a robust parameter estimation procedure building
on the work of Chen and Liu 共1993a, 1993b兲. Detection and modeling of outliers in traffic condition data are necessary to eliminate model identification errors and parameter estimate bias.
Capacity-reducing incidents are the principal cause of outliers in
univariate traffic condition data streams.
In Williams 共1999兲 and follow-on research 共Smith et al. 2002兲,
the joint outlier detection and parameter estimation procedure was
applied to several freeway traffic condition data sets, with the
final model form selected on the basis of the Schwarz Bayesian
information criterion 共Schwarz 1978兲. These modeling efforts re-

Although the purpose of this paper is not to definitively establish
the practical viability of widespread use of seasonal ARIMA for
ITS traffic condition forecasting, it is nonetheless important to
compare the empirical forecasting results to reasonable heuristic
forecasting methods. The purpose of this comparison is to assess
the likelihood that fitted ARIMA models will provide a statistically significant increase in forecast accuracy sufficient to justify
going beyond easy-to-understand heuristic techniques that require
little or no customization. The predictive performance of the seasonal ARIMA models presented in this paper is tested against
three heuristic forecasting methods: the random walk forecast, the
historical average forecast, and a deviation from the historical
average forecast.

Fig. 4. Autocorrelation function for undifferenced data
668 / JOURNAL OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING © ASCE / NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2003

Fig. 5. Autocorrelation function for seasonally differenced data

Random Walk Forecast
If we explicitly or implicitly consider that traffic condition data
streams can be well modeled as a 2D random walk, then the best
forecast for the next observation in the series is simply the most
recent observation, that is, V̂ t⫹1 ⫽V t . This is because if our data
series is a random walk we have no expectation of the direction or
magnitude of the change from one step to the next. This is obviously not the case with traffic condition data, but changes from
one interval to the next are often relatively small, so this approach
gives somewhat reasonable predictions in many cases. As touched
on in the introduction, traffic management and control actions or
decisions made in response to currently sensed conditions carry
an implicit assumption that random walk forecasts are reasonable.
One way of looking at the random walk forecast is that it is
fully informed by the current conditions but completely uninformed by historical patterns. If the modeled process were truly a
random walk, there would be no historical patterns, only uncorrelated fluctuations. However, we know, as illustrated by Fig. 1,
that traffic condition data follow dependable weekly patterns.
This leads to the second heuristic forecasting approach, historical
average forecasts.
Historical Average Forecast
The phenomenon that traffic conditions follow nominally consistent daily and weekly patterns leads to an expectation that historical averages of the conditions at a particular time and day of the
week will provide a reasonable forecast of future conditions at the
same time of day and day of the week. A straight historical average forecast is the antithesis of the random walk forecast; in the
historical average forecast, predictions are informed solely by
previously observed patterns, but completely uninformed by the
current conditions.
A straight historical average prediction method was used in the
AUTOGUIDE ATIS demonstration project in London 共Jeffrey
et al. 1987兲. However, intuition holds that averaging that applies
greater weight to more recent observations would provide consistently better forecasts than straight averages, either of all past
observations or of a fixed moving window of past observations.
This would allow the historically based estimates to track with the
yearly ebb and flow of traffic levels, as well as general long-term
traffic level trends.
Simple exponential smoothing of traffic condition observations at each time of day and day of week provides a convenient
method of computing such a weighted average. Let our traffic
condition data series be 兵 V t 其 . If the discrete data interval is 15

min, there will be a lag of 672 intervals between each successive
observation at the same time of day and day of week. In this case,
the exponentially smoothed forecast would be calculated with
smoothing parameter ␣ by the equation
V̂ t⫹672⫽␣V t ⫹ 共 1⫺␣ 兲 V̂ t

(7)

To be considered a heuristic approach, the smoothing parameter ␣ must be based on expert judgment rather than estimated
from representative data. If ␣ is estimated from the data, the result
is essentially a fitted ARIMA 共0,1,1兲 model, and each time of day
and day of week could have its own smoothing parameter.
The smoothing parameter ␣ in general should fall between
zero and one. As ␣ approaches zero, the forecast approaches a
straight average of past observations, and as ␣ approaches one,
the forecast approaches the random walk forecast. Gardner 共1985兲
found that smoothing parameters smaller than 0.3 were usually
recommended by practitioners. Intuitively it seems reasonable
that the smoothing parameter for traffic condition data should be
relatively small because it is desirable for the estimates to follow
the modest cycles and trends while not being thrown off by abnormally high or low observations. Therefore, a smoothing parameter ␣ of 0.2 is used for historical average estimation in this
study.
If the current conditions are normal, historical average forecasts can outperform random walk forecasts, especially during

Fig. 6. Autocorrelation function for seasonally differenced I-75 test
data

JOURNAL OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING © ASCE / NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2003 / 669

Table 3. Fitted Models with Lowest SBC Values
ARIMA model

Table 5. Forecast Performance Comparison
RMSEP

MAD

MAPE
共%兲

STDEV
error

332.22
466.29
400.99
378.89

204.89
288.60
258.00
228.47

8.74
12.53
11.43
9.78

324.68
463.75
400.64
378.92

141.73
180.02
192.63
153.54

75.02
95.05
123.56
81.19

8.97
10.10
12.85
9.54

138.15
205.95
180.01
153.54

SBC
Data series/model

M25 models
(1,0,1)(0,1,1) 672
(1,0,2)(0,1,1) 672
(2,0,1)(0,1,1) 672
I-75 models
(1,0,1)(0,1,1) 672
(3,0,0)(0,1,1) 672
(1,0,2)(0,1,1) 672

58,092
58,100
58,100
146,807
146,811
146,812

times when traffic levels are routinely increasing or decreasing.
However, historical average forecasts cannot respond to dynamic
conditions that differ from the norm, such as increased traffic
levels related to a special event or decreased traffic levels during
a general holiday. The final forecasting heuristic seeks to remedy
this weakness by combining the dynamic responsiveness of the
random walk forecast with the process memory of the historical
average forecast.
Deviation from Historical Average Forecasts
The final heuristic prediction method is a straightforward combination of the random walk and historical average forecasts. In this
method, exponentially weighted historical averages are computed
for each time of the day and day of the week. To compute the
forecast for the next interval, the ratio of the most recent observation to its corresponding historical average is multiplied by the
current historical average for the forecast interval. In equation
form, let 兵 V t 其 be a 15-min discrete interval traffic data series and
兵 S t 其 be the corresponding series of smoothed historical averages
calculated by
S t ⫽␣V t ⫹ 共 1⫺␣ 兲 S t⫺672

(8)

The one-step prediction is calculated by
V̂ t⫹1 ⫽

Vt
*S
S t t⫺671

(9)

Once again, if the smoothing parameter is based on expert judgment rather than derived from the data, this method can be considered a heuristic approach. The underlying assumption is that
the most recently observed ratio of existing to historical conditions will persist into the near future.
A similar approach is used in the Leitund Information System
Berlin 共LISB兲 to forecast link travel time 共Kaysi et al. 1993兲.
LISB was a full-scale commercial route-guidance system trial in
West Berlin. This system, now referred to as ALI-SCOUT, uses
infrared communications to transmit traveler information to the
drivers of equipped vehicles.
It is worth noting that the deviation from the historical average
forecast is quite similar to the seasonal ARIMA (1,0,1)
⫻(0,1,1) 672 model that emerged from systematic time series
analysis of the development data sets. The seasonal component of
the selected ARIMA model produces exponentially weighted averages at each 15-min time period. Therefore the multiplicative

Table 4. ARIMA (1,0,1)(0,1,1) 672 Model Parameters
Data series

␾1

␪1

⌰1

M25 station 4762A
I-75 station 10048

0.88
0.95

0.54
0.15

0.85
0.85

M25 station 4762A
Seasonal ARIMA
Random walk
Historical average
Deviation from
historical average
I-75 station 10048
Seasonal ARIMA
Random walk
Historical average
Deviation from
historical average

model is essentially an ARMA 共1,1兲 model fitted to the deviations
from the current smoothed time period averages. The intuition
that the ratio of current conditions to historical conditions will
persist into the near-term future is supported by the fact that both
fitted models have a high estimate for the autoregressive parameter ␾ 1 , 0.88 and 0.95, respectively, for M25 and I-75.

Predictive Performance
The seasonal ARIMA predictions were compared to the three heuristic approaches described above. The one-step predictions were
generated for the second partition of each of the data sets as
presented in Table 1 and Table 2. These data were not used in the
model identification or parameter estimation phases.
Three statistics are used to compare predictive performance:
root mean square error of prediction 共RMSEP兲, mean absolute
deviation 共MAD兲, and mean absolute percentage error 共MAPE兲.
The MAPE statistic is the most useful and illustrative because the
nominal level of traffic flow measurements varies by an order of
magnitude between the daily peaks and troughs. Furthermore, the
MAPE statistic allows for some degree of comparison of general
predictive performance among processes that have different
nominal levels. For example, the M25 and I-75 data series used in
this study differ by a factor that largely results from the fact that
the M25 flow rates are aggregate rates across all travel lanes
while the I-75 flow rates are average per lane rates. This factor
carries over to the RMSEP and MAD statistics but not to the
MAPE statistic.
Table 5 presents the predictive performance of each forecasting method for the test data sets. In addition to the goodness of fit
statistics described in the previous paragraph, Table 5 also includes the standard deviation 共STDEV兲 of each method’s forecast
errors. The error standard deviations are provided to give a sense
of the one-step forecast confidence intervals.
The Table 5 results support the theoretical applicability of seasonal ARIMA for univariate traffic condition modeling and forecasting. The seasonal ARIMA models provide the best forecasts
based on all the prediction performance statistics. As expected,
the deviation from the historical average heuristic prediction
method provided the second best forecast performance. The performance of the random walk and historical average predictions is
reversed for the two data sets. As discussed above, the historical
average prediction would be expected to achieve its best results
during times when traffic levels are closely following normal conditions, and the random walk prediction would be expected to

670 / JOURNAL OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING © ASCE / NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2003

Table 6. M25 Forecast Performance Comparison to Clark et al.

共1998兲
Model
Seasonal ARIMA
Kohonen map/ARIMA
Random walk

MAD

MAPE 共%兲

384
514
488

8.6
11.5
10.4

slowly to the lower than normal observations as they persist. Although its immediate adaptation to the observed to historical ratio
allows the deviation from the historical average forecast to perform quite well during the period from 8:15 a.m. to 9:45 a.m., this
characteristic also results in model instability in the face of rapid
shifts. The clearest example of this is the greater than 100% forecast error at 8:00 a.m. caused by the deviation from historical
average forecast fully applying the higher than average observation at 7:45 a.m in its one-step prediction.

Comparison to Other Research

Fig. 7. Representative plots of observed and predicted flow rates

outperform the historical average forecasts at times when current
traffic levels are exhibiting significant deviation from normal conditions. Therefore, it is likely that close inspection of the test data
sets for the two locations would reveal that traffic conditions at
the M25 detector station are more closely following normal patterns during the time period of the test data than are traffic conditions at the I-75 detector station.
A visual example of the comparative forecast performance is
given in Fig. 7. The plots show the observed 15-min traffic volumes from 5:00 a.m. to noon for an arbitrarily selected weekday
morning from the test data for each site. The plots also show the
corresponding seasonal ARIMA, exponentially weighted historical average, and deviation from the historical average predictions.
In the interest of clarity, the random walk forecasts are not shown,
but would simply be the observed traffic volumes shifted one
15-min interval to the right.
The I-75 plot in Fig. 7 illustrates that the seasonal ARIMA and
deviation from historical average forecasts are nearly identical
when observed values are tracking closely to historical norms.
The M25 plot, on the other hand, shows how the response of the
seasonal ARIMA and deviation from historical average forecasts
differs when observations go through an extended departure from
normal levels. The M25 plot indicates that observations were normal through 7:30 a.m., but the 7:45 a.m. observation was about
1,500 vehicles per hour above normal, and the 8:00 a.m. through
10:45 a.m. observations were approximately 2,000 vehicles per
hour below normal. In this extended period of below-normal traffic volumes, the deviation from the historical average forecast
tracks well with the observations. This is as expected because the
deviation from historical average forecasts assume that each ratio
of observed to historical traffic volume will fully persist into the
next interval.
In contrast, the M25 seasonal ARIMA forecasts continue to
give a measure of deference to the historical levels, adapting more

The M25 data set used in this study has been the subject of
considerable traffic flow prediction research performed at ITSLeeds 关including Clark et al. 1998 and Chen and Grant-Mueller
共2001兲兴. Clark et al. 共1998兲 presented a layered forecast approach
consisting of a Kohonen map neural network used to classify
traffic flow data streams into one of four categories, each category
in turn having an independent fitted ARIMA forecast model. The
Clark et al. 共1998兲 research used the same data location and time
frame as the seasonal ARIMA modeling presented in this paper,
but forecast performance statistics were presented only for the
hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on the weekdays of October 25
and 28 to 31, 1996. Table 6 provides a comparison of the seasonal
ARIMA forecasts to the Kohonen map/ARIMA forecasts over
this same time period, along with the corresponding random walk
forecasts. It is noteworthy that the Kohonen map/ARIMA forecasts were outperformed by the random walk forecasts in terms of
both MAD and MAPE.
Chen and Grant-Mueller 共2001兲 present the findings of further
ITS-Leeds research to develop and test a ‘‘sequential learning’’
neural network forecasting approach. The data are the same M25
traffic volumes used in this paper and in the earlier ITS-Leeds
research. As with the Kohonen map modeling discussed above,
the researchers used the final five weekdays in October 1996 for
forecast model testing. However, for the sequential learning neural network effort, the 1-min flows were aggregated into running
15-min averages; in other words, 15-min averages were computed
at each 1-min interval rather than only at the quarter-hour points.
As a quick comparison, the seasonal ARIMA model presented
in this study was applied to the series of running 15-min averages.
This process was straightforward in that the series of 1-min running 15-min averages can be treated as 15 interleaved discrete
interval time series. No parameter reestimation was done, and
therefore the seasonal ARIMA forecasts were computed using
parameters estimated only on the original quarter-hour interval
development series. From the graphs and discussion in Chen and
Grant-Mueller 共2001兲, the best-performing sequential learning
neural network achieved a MAPE of approximately 9 to 9.5% for
the five test days. The seasonal ARIMA model applied as described above achieved a MAPE of 8.9% over the same period.
This is only slightly higher than the 8.6% MAPE for the original
15-min discrete interval series over the same five days. It is likely
that the seasonal ARIMA MAPE for the 1-min running 15-min

JOURNAL OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING © ASCE / NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2003 / 671

average series would improve slightly if the parameters were optimized for running averages in the development data.

Discussion of Findings
Experimental analysis of two representative freeway data sets
supports the theoretical basis for modeling and forecasting
univariate traffic condition data as a seasonal ARIMA process.
One-step seasonal ARIMA predictions consistently outperformed
heuristic forecast benchmarks. It is necessary to point out that the
assertions and findings presented in this paper directly contradict
a statement in Kirby et al. 共1997兲, namely that extending simple
ARIMA models ‘‘to include seasonal and other effects, in practice... did not have a substantial impact on the results.’’ On the
contrary, a first seasonal difference taken at a one-week lag is the
key to proper application of ARIMA modeling to time-indexed
traffic volumes.
The statement in Kirby et al. 共1997兲 may have been the product of the data used in the underlying research. The Williams
共1999兲 research also included the Beaune, France, data used in the
Kirby et al. 共1997兲 research, which consist of southbound flows in
the peak summer holiday season on the route from Paris to the
French Riviera. Traffic flow levels over this period are extremely
heavy, deviate significantly from normal weekly patterns, and do
not settle down to a consistent weekly pattern. Therefore it is true
that the strengths of seasonal ARIMA modeling are not as clearly
demonstrated in relation to these data. However, this data set is
atypical and not appropriate for supporting general assertions
relative to traffic condition forecasting.
Furthermore, the theoretical foundation for seasonal ARIMA
modeling negates any theoretical motivation to investigate highlevel nonlinear mapping approaches, such as neural networks.
This assertion is supported by comparison to actual neural network forecasting results with a common data set.

Recommendations
Neural network and nonparametric approaches such as nearestneighbor regression provide a desirable feature in their ability to
adapt to or ‘‘learn’’ the process being modeled. This adaptive
learning feature would certainly be valuable for advanced traffic
management systems by automating the task of maintaining
model accuracy. An ideal forecasting method would be plug-andplay with little or no off-line, human intensive model training or
retraining necessary. However, the seasonal ARIMA model presented in this paper can be represented in state space form and
can therefore be implemented using adaptive Kalman filtering
techniques to update the parameter estimates. Follow-on research
is needed to develop and test the validity and efficiency of such a
seasonal ARIMA-based adaptive Kalman filtering approach.
At a minimum, future research on alternate univariate forecast
approaches should include comparisons to seasonal ARIMA and
heuristic forecasting performance. The ARIMA (1,0,1)(0,1,1) S
model provides a simple three-parameter linear recursive estimator. Therefore, an appropriately applied seasonal ARIMA model
should be considered the parametric model benchmark for
univariate traffic condition forecasting. Likewise, the deviation

from the historical average prediction method described in this
paper provides good forecasts and should be considered a key
heuristic forecast benchmark.

Acknowledgments
The writers would like to acknowledge the support of the Virginia
Transportation Research Council, the Virginia Department of
Transportation, the Georgia Transportation Institute, the Georgia
Department of Transportation, and the Federal Highway Administration through the Mid-Atlantic Universities Transportation
Center. The writers would also like to acknowledge the Telematics Division of the United Kingdom Highways Agency for their
graciousness in providing the M25 data used in this study.

References
Brockwell, P. J., and Davis, R. A. 共1996兲. Introduction to time series and
forecasting, Springer, New York.
Chen, C., and Liu, L. 共1993a兲. ‘‘Forecasting time series with outliers.’’ J.
Forecasting, 12共1兲, 13–36.
Chen, C., and Liu, L. 共1993b兲. ‘‘Joint estimation of model parameters and
outlier effects in time series.’’ J. Am. Stat. Assoc., 88共421兲, 284 –297.
Chen, H., and Grant-Mueller, S. 共2001兲. ‘‘Use of sequential learning for
short-term traffic flow forecasting.’’ Transp. Res., Part C: Emerg.
Technol., 9共5兲, 319–336.
Clark, S. D., Chen, H., and Grant-Muller, S. 共1998兲. ‘‘Artificial neural
network and statistical modelling of traffic flows—The best of both
worlds.’’ 8th World Congress on Transport Research, Antwerp, Belgium, July 12–17, Pergamon, New York, Paper No. 630.
Daganzo, C. F. 共1999兲. ‘‘The lagged cell-transmission model.’’ Proc.,
14th Int. Symp. on Transportation and Traffic Theory, A. Ceder, ed.,
Pergamon, New York, 81–106.
Fuller, W. A. 共1996兲. Introduction to statistical time series, 2nd Ed.,
Wiley, New York.
Gardner, E. S., Jr. 共1985兲. ‘‘Exponential smoothing: The state of the art.’’
J. Forecasting, 4共1兲, 1–38.
Jeffrey, D. J., Russam, K., and Robertson, D. I. 共1987兲. ‘‘Electronic route
guidance by AUTOGUIDE: The research background.’’ Traffic Eng.
Control, 28共10兲, 525–529.
Kaysi, I., Ben-Akiva, M., and Koutsopoulos, H. 共1993兲. ‘‘Integrated approach to vehicle routing and congestion prediction for real-time
driver guidance.’’ Transportation Research Record 1408, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, Washington, D.C.,
66 –74.
Kirby, H., Dougherty, M., and Watson, S. 共1997兲. ‘‘Should we use neural
networks or statistical models for short term motorway traffic forecasting?’’ Int. J. Forecasting, 13共1兲, 43–50.
Okutani, I., and Stephanedes, Y. J. 共1984兲. ‘‘Dynamic prediction of traffic
volume through Kalman filtering theory.’’ Transp. Res., Part B: Methodol., 18共1兲, 1–11.
Schwarz, G. 共1978兲. ‘‘Estimating the dimension of a model.’’ Ann. Stat.,
6共2兲, 461– 464.
Smith, B. L., Williams, B. M., and Oswald, R. K. 共2002兲. ‘‘Comparison
of parametric and nonparametric models for traffic flow forecasting.’’
Transp. Res., Part C: Emerg. Technol., 10共4兲, 257–321.
Williams, B. M. 共1999兲. ‘‘Modeling and forecasting vehicular traffic flow
as a seasonal stochastic time series process.’’ PhD dissertation, Univ.
of Virginia, Charlottesville, Va.
Williams, B. M. 共2001兲. ‘‘Multivariate vehicular traffic flow prediction:
Evaluation of ARIMAX modeling.’’ Transportation Research Record
1776, Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C., 194 –200.

672 / JOURNAL OF TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING © ASCE / NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2003

