Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Computer Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet

The Internet of Things: A survey
Luigi Atzori a, Antonio Iera b, Giacomo Morabito c,*
a
b
c

DIEE, University of Cagliari, Italy
University ‘‘Mediterranea” of Reggio Calabria, Italy
University of Catania, Italy

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 10 December 2009
Received in revised form 27 April 2010
Accepted 14 May 2010
Available online 1 June 2010
Responsible Editor: E. Ekici
Keywords:
Internet of Things
Pervasive computing
RFID systems

a b s t r a c t
This paper addresses the Internet of Things. Main enabling factor of this promising paradigm is the integration of several technologies and communications solutions. Identiﬁcation and tracking technologies, wired and wireless sensor and actuator networks,
enhanced communication protocols (shared with the Next Generation Internet), and distributed intelligence for smart objects are just the most relevant. As one can easily imagine,
any serious contribution to the advance of the Internet of Things must necessarily be the
result of synergetic activities conducted in different ﬁelds of knowledge, such as telecommunications, informatics, electronics and social science. In such a complex scenario, this
survey is directed to those who want to approach this complex discipline and contribute
to its development. Different visions of this Internet of Things paradigm are reported
and enabling technologies reviewed. What emerges is that still major issues shall be faced
by the research community. The most relevant among them are addressed in details.
Ó 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
The Internet of Things (IoT) is a novel paradigm that is
rapidly gaining ground in the scenario of modern wireless
telecommunications. The basic idea of this concept is the
pervasive presence around us of a variety of things or
objects – such as Radio-Frequency IDentiﬁcation (RFID)
tags, sensors, actuators, mobile phones, etc. – which,
through unique addressing schemes, are able to interact
with each other and cooperate with their neighbors to
reach common goals [1].
Unquestionably, the main strength of the IoT idea is the
high impact it will have on several aspects of everyday-life
and behavior of potential users. From the point of view of a
private user, the most obvious effects of the IoT introduction will be visible in both working and domestic ﬁelds.
In this context, domotics, assisted living, e-health, enhanced learning are only a few examples of possible appli-

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +39 095 7382355; fax: +39 095 7382397.
E-mail addresses: l.atzori@diee.unica.it (L. Atzori), antonio.iera@unirc.
it (A. Iera), giacomo.morabito@diit.unict.it (G. Morabito).
1389-1286/$ - see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.010

cation scenarios in which the new paradigm will play a
leading role in the near future. Similarly, from the perspective of business users, the most apparent consequences
will be equally visible in ﬁelds such as, automation and
industrial manufacturing, logistics, business/process management, intelligent transportation of people and goods.
By starting from the considerations above, it should not
be surprising that IoT is included by the US National Intelligence Council in the list of six ‘‘Disruptive Civil Technologies” with potential impacts on US national power [2].
NIC foresees that ‘‘by 2025 Internet nodes may reside in
everyday things – food packages, furniture, paper documents, and more”. It highlights future opportunities that
will arise, starting from the idea that ‘‘popular demand
combined with technology advances could drive widespread diffusion of an Internet of Things (IoT) that could,
like the present Internet, contribute invaluably to economic development”. The possible threats deriving from
a widespread adoption of such a technology are also
stressed. Indeed, it is emphasized that ‘‘to the extent that
everyday objects become information security risks, the
IoT could distribute those risks far more widely than the
Internet has to date”.

2788

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

Actually, many challenging issues still need to be addressed and both technological as well as social knots have
to be untied before the IoT idea being widely accepted.
Central issues are making a full interoperability of interconnected devices possible, providing them with an always
higher degree of smartness by enabling their adaptation and
autonomous behavior, while guaranteeing trust, privacy,
and security. Also, the IoT idea poses several new problems
concerning the networking aspects. In fact, the things composing the IoT will be characterized by low resources in
terms of both computation and energy capacity. Accordingly, the proposed solutions need to pay special attention
to resource efﬁciency besides the obvious scalability
problems.
Several industrial, standardization and research bodies
are currently involved in the activity of development of
solutions to fulﬁll the highlighted technological requirements. This survey gives a picture of the current state of
the art on the IoT. More speciﬁcally, it:
 provides the readers with a description of the different
visions of the Internet of Things paradigm coming from
different scientiﬁc communities;
 reviews the enabling technologies and illustrates which
are the major beneﬁts of spread of this paradigm in
everyday-life;
 offers an analysis of the major research issues the scientiﬁc community still has to face.
The main objective is to give the reader the opportunity of
understanding what has been done (protocols, algorithms,
proposed solutions) and what still remains to be
addressed, as well as which are the enabling factors of this
evolutionary process and what are its weaknesses and risk
factors.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In
Section 2, we introduce and compare the different visions
of the IoT paradigm, which are available from the literature. The IoT main enabling technologies are the subject
of Section 3, while the description of the principal applications, which in the future will beneﬁt from the full deployment of the IoT idea, are addressed in Section 4. Section 5
gives a glance at the open issues on which research should
focus more, by stressing topics such as addressing, networking, security, privacy, and standardization efforts.
Conclusions and future research hints are given in Section
6.

2. One paradigm, many visions
Manifold deﬁnitions of Internet of Things traceable within the research community testify to the strong interest in
the IoT issue and to the vivacity of the debates on it. By
browsing the literature, an interested reader might experience a real difﬁculty in understanding what IoT really
means, which basic ideas stand behind this concept, and
which social, economical and technical implications the
full deployment of IoT will have.
The reason of today apparent fuzziness around this
term is a consequence of the name ‘‘Internet of Things”

itself, which syntactically is composed of two terms. The
ﬁrst one pushes towards a network oriented vision of IoT,
while the second one moves the focus on generic ‘‘objects”
to be integrated into a common framework.
Differences, sometimes substantial, in the IoT visions
raise from the fact that stakeholders, business alliances, research and standardization bodies start approaching the issue from either an ‘‘Internet oriented” or a ‘‘Things
oriented” perspective, depending on their speciﬁc interests, ﬁnalities and backgrounds.
It shall not be forgotten, anyway, that the words ‘‘Internet” and ‘‘Things”, when put together, assume a meaning
which introduces a disruptive level of innovation into today ICT world. In fact, ‘‘Internet of Things” semantically
means ‘‘a world-wide network of interconnected objects
uniquely addressable, based on standard communication
protocols” [3]. This implies a huge number of (heterogeneous) objects involved in the process.
The object unique addressing and the representation
and storing of the exchanged information become the most
challenging issues, bringing directly to a third, ‘‘Semantic
oriented”, perspective of IoT.
In Fig. 1, the main concepts, technologies and standards
are highlighted and classiﬁed with reference to the IoT vision/s they contribute to characterize best. From such an
illustration, it clearly appears that the IoT paradigm shall
be the result of the convergence of the three main visions
addressed above.
The very ﬁrst deﬁnition of IoT derives from a ‘‘Things
oriented” perspective; the considered things were very
simple items: Radio-Frequency IDentiﬁcation (RFID) tags.
The terms ‘‘Internet of Things” is, in fact, attributed to
The Auto-ID Labs [4], a world-wide network of academic
research laboratories in the ﬁeld of networked RFID and
emerging sensing technologies. These institutions, since
their establishment, have been targeted to architect the
IoT, together with EPCglobal [5]. Their focus has primarily been on the development of the Electronic Product
Code™ (EPC) to support the spread use of RFID in
world-wide modern trading networks, and to create
the industry-driven global standards for the EPCglobal
Network™. These standards are mainly designed to improve object visibility (i.e. the traceability of an object
and the awareness of its status, current location, etc.).
This is undoubtedly a key component of the path to
the full deployment of the IoT vision; but it is not the
only one.
In a broader sense, IoT cannot be just a global EPC system in which the only objects are RFIDs; they are just a
part of the full story! And the same holds for the alternative Unique/Universal/Ubiquitous IDentiﬁer (uID) architecture [6], whose main idea is still the development of
(middleware based) solutions for a global visibility of objects in an IoT vision. It is the authors’ opinion that, starting
from RFID centric solutions may be positive as the main aspects stressed by RFID technology, namely item traceability and addressability, shall deﬁnitely be addressed also
by the IoT. Notwithstanding, alternative, and somehow
more complete, IoT visions recognize that the term IoT implies a much wider vision than the idea of a mere objects
identiﬁcation.

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

2789

“Things”oriented visions
RFID
UID

Everyday
objects

NFC

Spimes
Wireless
Sensorsand
Actuators

Smart Items

WISP

Connectivity
for anything

Communicating
things
IPSO (IP for
Smart
Objects)

INTERNET
OF
THINGS

Reasoning
over data

Internet 0
Web of
Things

Semantic
Technologies

Smart
Semantic
Middleware

“Internet”-oriented
visions

Semantic execution
environments

“Semantic”
-oriented
visions

Fig. 1. ‘‘Internet of Things” paradigm as a result of the convergence of different visions.

According to the authors of [7], RFID still stands at the
forefront of the technologies driving the vision. This a consequence of the RFID maturity, low cost, and strong support from the business community. However, they state
that a wide portfolio of device, network, and service technologies will eventually build up the IoT. Near Field Communications (NFC) and Wireless Sensor and Actuator
Networks (WSAN) together with RFID are recognized as
‘‘the atomic components that will link the real world with
the digital world”. It is also worth recalling that major projects are being carried out with the aim of developing relevant platforms, such as the WISP (Wireless Identiﬁcation
and Sensing Platforms) project.
The one in [7] is not the only ‘‘Things oriented” vision
clearly speaking of something going beyond RFID. Another
one has been proposed by the United Nations, which, during the 2005 Tunis meeting, predicted the advent of IoT. A
UN Report states that a new era of ubiquity is coming
where humans may become the minority as generators
and receivers of trafﬁc and changes brought about by the
Internet will be dwarfed by those prompted by the networking of everyday objects [8].
Similarly, other relevant institutions have stressed the
concept that IoT has primarily to be focused on the
‘‘Things” and that the road to its full deployment has
to start from the augmentation in the Things’ intelligence. This is why a concept that emerged aside IoT is
the spime, deﬁned as an object that can be tracked
through space and time throughout its lifetime and that
will be sustainable, enhanceable, and uniquely identiﬁable [9]. Although quite theoretical, the spime deﬁnition
ﬁnds some real-world implementations in so called
Smart Items. These are a sort of sensors not only

equipped with usual wireless communication, memory,
and elaboration capabilities, but also with new potentials. Autonomous and proactive behavior, context
awareness, collaborative communications and elaboration are just some required capabilities.
The deﬁnitions above paved the way to the ITU vision of
the IoT, according to which: ‘‘from anytime, anyplace connectivity for anyone, we will now have connectivity for
anything” [10]. A similar vision is available from documents and communications of the European Commission,
in which the most recurrent deﬁnition of IoT involves
‘‘Things having identities and virtual personalities operating in smart spaces using intelligent interfaces to connect
and communicate within social, environmental, and user
contexts” [3].
An IoT vision statement, which goes well beyond a mere
‘‘RFID centric” approach, is also proposed by the consortium CASAGRAS [11]. Its members focus on ‘‘a world where
things can automatically communicate to computers and
each other providing services to the beneﬁt of the human
kind”. CASAGRAS consortium (i) proposes a vision of IoT
as a global infrastructure which connects both virtual
and physical generic objects and (ii) highlights the importance of including existing and evolving Internet and network developments in this vision. In this sense, IoT
becomes the natural enabling architecture for the deployment of independent federated services and applications,
characterized by a high degree of autonomous data capture, event transfer, network connectivity and
interoperability.
This deﬁnition plays the role of trait d’union between
what we referred to as a ‘‘Things oriented” vision and an
‘‘Internet oriented” vision.

2790

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

Within the latter category falls the IoT vision of the IPSO
(IP for Smart Objects) Alliance [11], a forum formed in September 2008 by 25 founding companies to promote the
Internet Protocol as the network technology for connecting
Smart Objects around the world. According to the IPSO vision, the IP stack is a light protocol that already connects a
huge amount of communicating devices and runs on tiny
and battery operated embedded devices. This guarantees
that IP has all the qualities to make IoT a reality. By reading
IPSO whitepapers, it seems that through a wise IP adaptation and by incorporating IEEE 802.15.4 into the IP architecture, in the view of 6LoWPAN [12], the full
deployment of the IoT paradigm will be automatically
enabled.
Internet Ø [13] follows a similar approach of reducing
the complexity of the IP stack to achieve a protocol designed to route ‘‘IP over anything”. In some forums this is
looked at as the wisest way to move from the Internet of
Devices to the Internet of Things. According to both the
IPSO and Internet Ø approaches, the IoT will be deployed
by means of a sort of simpliﬁcation of the current IP to
adapt it to any object and make those objects addressable
and reachable from any location.
As said before, it is worth noticing that ‘‘Semantic oriented” IoT visions are available in the literature [14–17].
The idea behind them is that the number of items involved
in the Future Internet is destined to become extremely
high. Therefore, issues related to how to represent, store,
interconnect, search, and organize information generated
by the IoT will become very challenging. In this context,
semantic technologies could play a key role. In fact, these
can exploit appropriate modeling solutions for things
description, reasoning over data generated by IoT, semantic execution environments and architectures that accommodate IoT requirements and scalable storing and
communication infrastructure [14].
A further vision correlated with the IoT is the so called
‘‘Web of Things” [18], according to which Web standards
are re-used to connect and integrate into the Web everyday-life objects that contain an embedded device or
computer.
3. Enabling technologies
Actualization of the IoT concept into the real world is
possible through the integration of several enabling technologies. In this section we discuss the most relevant ones.
Note that it is not our purpose to provide a comprehensive
survey of each technology. Our major aim is to provide a
picture of the role they will likely play in the IoT. Interested
readers will ﬁnd references to technical publications for
each speciﬁc technology.
3.1. Identiﬁcation, sensing and communication technologies
‘‘Anytime, anywhere, anymedia” has been for a long
time the vision pushing forward the advances in communication technologies. In this context, wireless technologies
have played a key role and today the ratio between radios
and humans is nearing the 1 to 1 value [19].

However, the reduction in terms of size, weight, energy
consumption, and cost of the radio can take us to a new era
where the above ratio increases of orders of magnitude.
This will allow us to integrate radios in almost all objects
and thus, to add the world ‘‘anything” to the above vision,
which leads to the IoT concept.
In this context, key components of the IoT will be RFID
systems [20], which are composed of one or more reader(s)
and several RFID tags. Tags are characterized by a unique
identiﬁer and are applied to objects (even persons or animals). Readers trigger the tag transmission by generating
an appropriate signal, which represents a query for the
possible presence of tags in the surrounding area and for
the reception of their IDs. Accordingly, RFID systems can
be used to monitor objects in real-time, without the need
of being in line-of-sight; this allows for mapping the real
world into the virtual world. Therefore, they can be used
in an incredibly wide range of application scenarios, spanning from logistics to e-health and security.
From a physical point of view a RFID tag is a small
microchip1 attached to an antenna (that is used for both
receiving the reader signal and transmitting the tag ID) in
a package which usually is similar to an adhesive sticker
[21]. Dimensions can be very low: Hitachi has developed a
tag with dimensions 0.4 mm  0.4 mm  0.15 mm.
Usually, RFID tags are passive, i.e., they do not have onboard power supplies and harvest the energy required for
transmitting their ID from the query signal transmitted
by a RFID reader in the proximity. In fact, this signal generates a current into the tag antenna by induction and such a
current is utilized to supply the microchip which will
transmit the tag ID. Usually, the gain (power of the signal
received by the reader divided by the power of the signal
transmitted by the same reader) characterizing such systems is very low. However, thanks to the highly directive
antennas utilized by the readers, tags ID can be correctly
received within a radio range that can be as long as a
few meters. Transmission may occur in several frequency
bands spanning from low frequencies (LF) at 124–
135 kHz up to ultra high frequencies (UHF) at 860–
960 MHz that have the longest range.
Nevertheless, there are also RFID tags getting power
supply by batteries. In this case we can distinguish semipassive from active RFID tags. In semi-passive RFIDs batteries power the microchip while receiving the signal from
the reader (the radio is powered with the energy harvested
by the reader signal). Differently, in active RFIDs the battery powers the transmission of the signal as well. Obviously the radio coverage is the highest for active tags
even if this is achieved at the expenses of higher production costs.
Sensor networks will also play a crucial role in the IoT.
In fact, they can cooperate with RFID systems to better
track the status of things, i.e., their location, temperature,
movements, etc. As such, they can augment the awareness
of a certain environment and, thus, act as a further bridge
between physical and digital world. Usage of sensor net-

1
New RFID tags, named chipless tags, are under study which do not use
microchips so as to decrease production cost [96].

2791

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

works has been proposed in several application scenarios,
such as environmental monitoring, e-health, intelligent
transportation systems, military, and industrial plant
monitoring.
Sensor networks consist of a certain number (which can
be very high) of sensing nodes communicating in a wireless multi-hop fashion. Usually nodes report the results
of their sensing to a small number (in most cases, only
one) of special nodes called sinks. A large scientiﬁc literature has been produced on sensor networks in the recent
past, addressing several problems at all layers of the protocol stack [22]. Design objectives of the proposed solutions
are energy efﬁciency (which is the scarcest resource in
most of the scenarios involving sensor networks), scalability (the number of nodes can be very high), reliability (the
network may be used to report urgent alarm events), and
robustness (sensor nodes are likely to be subject to failures
for several reasons).
Today, most of commercial wireless sensor network
solutions are based on the IEEE 802.15.4 standard, which
deﬁnes the physical and MAC layers for low-power, low
bit rate communications in wireless personal area networks (WPAN) [23]. IEEE 802.15.4 does not include speciﬁcations on the higher layers of the protocol stack, which is
necessary for the seamless integration of sensor nodes into
the Internet. This is a difﬁcult task for several reasons, the
most important are given below:
 Sensor networks may consist of a very large number of
nodes. This would result in obvious problems as today
there is a scarce availability of IP addresses.
 The largest physical layer packet in IEEE 802.15.4 has
127 bytes; the resulting maximum frame size at the
media access control layer is 102 octets, which may further decrease based on the link layer security algorithm
utilized. Such sizes are too small when compared to
typical IP packet sizes.
 In many scenarios sensor nodes spend a large part of
their time in a sleep mode to save energy and cannot
communicate during these periods. This is absolutely
anomalous for IP networks.
Integration of sensing technologies into passive RFID tags
would enable a lot of completely new applications into
the IoT context, especially into the e-health area [24].
Recently, several solutions have been proposed in this
direction. As an example, the WISP project is being carried
out at Intel Labs to develop wireless identiﬁcation and sensing platforms (WISP) [25]. WISPs are powered and read by
standard RFID readers, harvesting the power from the
reader’s querying signal. WISPs have been used to measure
quantities in a certain environment, such as light, temperature, acceleration, strain, and liquid level.

Sensing RFID systems will allow to build RFID sensor
networks [26], which consist of small, RFID-based sensing
and computing devices, and RFID readers, which are the
sinks of the data generated by the sensing RFID tags and
provide the power for the network operation.
Table 1 compares the characteristics of RFID systems
(RFID), wireless sensor networks (WSN), and RFID sensor
networks (RSN) [26]. Observe that the major advantages
of:
 RFID systems are the very small size and the very low
cost. Furthermore, their lifetime is not limited by the
battery duration;
 wireless sensor networks are the high radio coverage
and the communication paradigm, which does not
require the presence of a reader (communication is
peer-to-peer whereas, it is asymmetric for the other
types of systems);
 RFID sensor network are the possibility of supporting
sensing, computing, and communication capabilities
in a passive system.
3.2. Middleware
The middleware is a software layer or a set of sub-layers interposed between the technological and the application levels. Its feature of hiding the details of different
technologies is fundamental to exempt the programmer
from issues that are not directly pertinent to her/his focus, which is the development of the speciﬁc application
enabled by the IoT infrastructures. The middleware is
gaining more and more importance in the last years due
to its major role in simplifying the development of new
services and the integration of legacy technologies into
new ones. This excepts the programmer from the exact
knowledge of the variegate set of technologies adopted
by the lower layers.
As it is happening in other contexts, the middleware
architectures proposed in the last years for the IoT often
follow the Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) approach.
The adoption of the SOA principles allows for decomposing complex and monolithic systems into applications
consisting of an ecosystem of simpler and well-deﬁned
components. The use of common interfaces and standard
protocols gives a horizontal view of an enterprise system.
Thus, the development of business processes enabled by
the SOA is the result of the process of designing workﬂows of coordinated services, which eventually are associated with objects actions. This facilitates the
interaction among the parts of an enterprise and allows
for reducing the time necessary to adapt itself to the
changes imposed by the market evolution [27]. A SOA approach also allows for software and hardware reusing, be-

Table 1
Comparison between RFID systems, wireless sensor networks, and RFID sensor networks.

RFID
WSN
RSN

Processing

Sensing

Communication

Range (m)

Power

Lifetime

Size

Standard

No
Yes
Yes

No
Yes
Yes

Asymmetric
Peer-to-peer
Asymmetric

10
100
3

Harvested
Battery
Harvested

Indeﬁnite
<3 years
Indeﬁnite

Very small
Small
Small

ISO18000
IEEE 802.15.4
None

2792

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

cause it does not impose a speciﬁc technology for the service implementation [28].
Advantages of the SOA approach are recognized in most
studies on middleware solutions for IoT. While a commonly accepted layered architecture is missing, the proposed solutions face essentially the same problems of
abstracting the devices functionalities and communications capabilities, providing a common set of services and
an environment for service composition. These common
objectives lead to the deﬁnition of the middleware sketch
shown in Fig. 2. It tries to encompass all the functionalities
addressed in past works dealing with IoT middleware issues. It is quite similar to the scheme proposed in [29],
which addresses the middleware issues with a complete
and integrated architectural approach. It relies on the
layers explained in Sections 3.2.1–3.2.5.
3.2.1. Applications
Applications are on the top of the architecture, exporting all the system’s functionalities to the ﬁnal user. Indeed,
this layer is not considered to be part of the middleware
but exploits all the functionalities of the middleware layer.
Through the use of standard web service protocols and service composition technologies, applications can realize a
perfect integration between distributed systems and
applications.
3.2.2. Service composition
This is a common layer on top of a SOA-based middleware architecture. It provides the functionalities for the
composition of single services offered by networked objects to build speciﬁc applications. On this layer there is
no notion of devices and the only visible assets are services. An important insight into the service landscape is
to have a repository of all currently connected service instances, which are executed in run-time to build composed
services. The logic behind the creation and the management of complex services, can be expressed in terms of

Fig. 2. SOA-based architecture for the IoT middleware.

workﬂows of business processes, using workﬂow languages. In this context, a frequent choice is to adopt standard languages such as the Business Process Execution
Language (BPEL) and Jolie [29,30]. Workﬂow languages deﬁne business processes that interact with external entities
through Web Service operations, deﬁned by using the Web
Service Deﬁnition Language (WSDL) [31]. Workﬂows can
be nested, so it is possible to call a workﬂow from inside
another one. The creation of complex processes can be represented as a sequence of coordinated actions performed
by single components.
3.2.3. Service management
This layer provides the main functions that are expected
to be available for each object and that allow for their management in the IoT scenario. A basic set of services encompasses: object dynamic discovery, status monitoring, and
service conﬁguration. At this layer, some middleware proposals include an expanded set of functionalities related to
the QoS management and lock management, as well as
some semantic functions (e.g., police and context management) [32]. This layer might enable the remote deployment of new services during run-time, in order to satisfy
application needs. A service repository is built at this layer
so as to know which is the catalogue of services that are
associated to each object in the network. The upper layer
can then compose complex services by joining services
provided at this layer.
3.2.4. Object abstraction
The IoT relies on a vast and heterogeneous set of objects, each one providing speciﬁc functions accessible
through its own dialect. There is thus the need for an
abstraction layer capable of harmonizing the access to
the different devices with a common language and procedure. Accordingly, unless a device offers discoverable
web services on an IP network, there is the need to introduce a wrapping layer, consisting of two main sub-layers:
the interface and the communication sub-layers. The ﬁrst
one provides a web interface exposing the methods available through a standard web service interface and is
responsible for the management of all the incoming/outcoming messaging operations involved in the communication with the external world. The second sub-layer
implements the logic behind the web service methods
and translates these methods into a set of device-speciﬁc
commands to communicate with the real-world objects.
Some works proposed the embedding of TCP/IP stacks
in the devices, such as the TinyTCP, the mIP and the IwIP
(see [33] and references herein), which provide a socket
like interface for embedded applications. Embedded web
servers can then be integrated in the objects, performing
the function of this object abstraction layer. However,
more often this wrapping function is provided through a
proxy, which is then responsible to open a communication
socket with the device’s console and send all the commands to it by using different communication languages.
It is then responsible to make the conversion into a standard web service language and, sometimes, elaborate the
request to reduce the complexity of the operations required by the end-device [30].

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

3.2.5. Trust, privacy and security management
The deployment of automatic communication of objects
in our lives represents a danger for our future. Indeed, unseen by users, embedded RFID tags in our personal devices,
clothes, and groceries can unknowingly be triggered to reply with their ID and other information. This potentially
enables a surveillance mechanism that would pervade
large parts of our lives. The middleware must then include
functions related to the management of the trust, privacy
and security of all the exchanged data. The related functions may be either built on one speciﬁc layer of the previous ones or (it happens more often) distributed through
the entire stack, from the object abstraction to the service
composition, in a manner that does not affect system performance or introduce excessive overheads.

While most of the proposed middleware solutions make
use of the SOA approach, some others have followed a different way, especially if developed for a speciﬁc scenario
(target application, speciﬁc set of objects or limited geographical scenario). One remarkable project is the Fosstrak
one, which is speciﬁcally focused on the management of
RFID related applications [34]. It is an open source RFID
infrastructure that implements the interfaces deﬁned in
the EPC Network speciﬁcations. It provides the following
services related to RFID management: data dissemination,
data aggregation, data ﬁltering, writing to a tag, trigger
RFID reader from external sensors, fault and conﬁguration
management, data interpretation, sharing of RFID triggered
business events, lookup and directory service, tag identiﬁer
management, and privacy [35]. All these functions are
made available to the application layer to ease the deployment of RFID-related services. In [36], the authors present
another RFID-related middleware which relies on three
functionalities: the tag, the place, and the scenic managers.
The ﬁrst allows the user to associate each tag to an object;
the second supports creating and editing location information associated to RFID antennas; the third one is used to
combine the events collected by the antennas and the
developed related applications.
Another architecture that does not follow the SOA approach is proposed in the e-SENSE project, which focuses
on issues related to capturing ambient intelligence through
wireless sensor networks. The proposed architecture is divided into four logical subsystems, namely the application,
management, middleware, and connectivity subsystems.
Each subsystem comprises various protocol and control
entities, which offer a wide range of services and functions
at service access points to other subsystems [37]. This entire
stack is implemented in a full function sensor node and in a
gateway node; while a reduced-function sensor node has
fewer functions. In the e-SENSE vision the middleware
subsystem has the only purpose to develop and handle an
infrastructure where information sensed by nodes is processed in a distributed fashion and, if necessary, the result
is transmitted to an actuating node and/or to the ﬁxed infrastructure by means of a gateway. The other functions that
we have assigned to the middleware shown in Fig. 2 are
attributed to other components and layers. The project
UbiSec&Sens was also aimed at deﬁning a comprehensive

2793

architecture for medium and large scale wireless sensor networks, with a particular attention to the security issues so as
to provide a trusted and secure environment for all applications [38]. The middleware layer in this architecture mostly
focuses on: (i) the secure long-term logging of the collected
environmental data over time and over some regions (TinyPEDS), (ii) functions that provides the nodes in the network
with the abstraction of shared memory (TinyDSM), (iii) the
implementation of distributed information storage and collection (DISC) protocol for wireless sensor networks.
4. Applications
Potentialities offered by the IoT make possible the
development of a huge number of applications, of which
only a very small part is currently available to our society.
Many are the domains and the environments in which new
applications would likely improve the quality of our lives:
at home, while travelling, when sick, at work, when jogging and at the gym, just to cite a few. These environments
are now equipped with objects with only primitive intelligence, most of times without any communication capabilities. Giving these objects the possibility to communicate
with each other and to elaborate the information perceived
from the surroundings imply having different environments where a very wide range of applications can be deployed. These can be grouped into the following domains:





Transportation and logistics domain.
Healthcare domain.
Smart environment (home, ofﬁce, plant) domain.
Personal and social domain.

Among the possible applications, we may distinguish
between those either directly applicable or closer to our
current living habitudes and those futuristic, which we
can only fancy of at the moment, since the technologies
and/or our societies are not ready for their deployment
(see Fig. 3). In the following subsections we provide a
review of the short-medium term applications for each of
these categories and a range of futuristic applications.
4.1. Transportation and logistics domain
Advanced cars, trains, buses as well as bicycles along
with roads and/or rails are becoming more instrumented
with sensors, actuators, and processing power. Roads
themselves and transported goods are also equipped with
tags and sensors that send important information to trafﬁc
control sites and transportation vehicles to better route the
trafﬁc, help in the management of the depots, provide the
tourist with appropriate transportation information, and
monitor the status of the transported goods. Below, the
main applications in the transportation and logistics domain are described.
4.1.1. Logistics
Real-time information processing technology based on
RFID and NFC can realize real-time monitoring of almost
every link of the supply chain, ranging from commodity design, raw material purchasing, production, transportation,

2794

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

Fig. 3. Applications domains and relevant major scenarios.

storage, distribution and sale of semi-products and products, returns’ processing and after-sales service. It is also
possible to obtain products related information, promptly,
timely, and accurately so that enterprises or even the whole
supply chain can respond to intricate and changeable markets in the shortest time. The application result is that the
reaction time of traditional enterprises is 120 days from
requirements of customers to the supply of commodity
while advanced companies that make use of these technologies (such as Wal-mart and Metro) only needs few days
and can basically work with zero safety stock [39,40]. Additionally, real-time access to the ERP program helps the shop
assistants to better inform customers about availability of
products and give them more product information in general [41].

4.1.2. Assisted driving
Cars, trains, and buses along with the roads and the rails
equipped with sensors, actuators and processing power
may provide important information to the driver and/or
passengers of a car to allow better navigation and safety.
Collision avoidance systems and monitoring of transportation of hazardous materials are two typical example functions. Governmental authorities would also beneﬁt from
more accurate information about road trafﬁc patterns for
planning purposes. Whereas the private transportation
trafﬁc could better ﬁnd the right path with appropriate
information about the jam and incidents. Enterprises, such
as freight companies, would be able to perform more effective route optimization which allows energy savings. Information about the movement of the vehicles transporting

goods together with information about the type and status
of the goods can be integrated to provide important information about the delivery time, delivery delays, and faults.
This information can be also combined with the status of
the warehouses in order to automate the reﬁlling of the
magazines.

4.1.3. Mobile ticketing
Posters or panels providing information (description,
costs, schedule) about transportation services can be
equipped with an NFC tag, a visual marker, and a numeric
identiﬁer. The user can then get information about several
categories of options from the web by either hovering his
mobile phone over the NFC tag, or pointing the mobile
phone to the visual markers. The mobile phone automatically gets information from the associated web services
(stations, numbers of passengers, costs, available seats
and type of services) and allows the user to buy the related
tickets [42].

4.1.4. Monitoring environmental parameters
Perishable goods such as fruits, fresh-cut produce, meat,
and dairy products are vital parts of our nutrition. From the
production to the consumption sites thousands of kilometers or even more are covered and during the transportation the conservation status (temperature, humidity,
shock) need to be monitored to avoid uncertainty in quality levels for distribution decisions. Pervasive computing
and sensor technologies offer great potential for improving
the efﬁciency of the food supply chain [43,44].

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

4.1.5. Augmented maps
Touristic maps can be equipped with tags that allow
NFC-equipped phones to browse it and automatically call
web services providing information about hotels, restaurants, monuments and events related to the area of interest
for the user [45]. There is a collection of Physical Mobile
Interaction (PMI) techniques that can be employed to augment the information of the map:
 hovering within read range of a tag so that additional
information regarding the marker is displayed on the
phone screen;
 single selection/de-selection of tags by pressing a speciﬁc key when the tag is hovered;
 multi-selection/de-selection of different tags;
 polygon drawing by selecting the tags in a polygon that
delimits an area of interest;
 picking-and-dropping, so that selected markers that
have been ‘picked up’ using the phone can be dropped
in the itinerary of interest;
 context menu displaying when a marker is hovered
[46].

2795

(including data entry and collection errors), automated
care and procedure auditing, and medical inventory management. This function also relates to integrating RFID
technology with other health information and clinical
application technologies within a facility and with potential expansions of such networks across providers and
locations.
4.2.4. Sensing
Sensor devices enable function centered on patients,
and in particular on diagnosing patient conditions, providing real-time information on patient health indicators.
Application domains include different telemedicine solutions, monitoring patient compliance with medication regiment prescriptions, and alerting for patient well-being. In
this capacity, sensors can be applied both in in-patient and
out-patient care. Heterogeneous wireless access-based remote patient monitoring systems can be deployed to reach
the patient everywhere, with multiple wireless technologies integrated to support continuous bio-signal monitoring in presence of patient mobility [48].
4.3. Smart environments domain

4.2. Healthcare domain
Many are the beneﬁts provided by the IoT technologies
to the healthcare domain and the resulting applications
can be grouped mostly into: tracking of objects and people
(staff and patients), identiﬁcation and authentication of
people, automatic data collection and sensing [47].
4.2.1. Tracking
Tracking is the function aimed at the identiﬁcation of a
person or object in motion. This includes both real-time
position tracking, such as the case of patient-ﬂow monitoring to improve workﬂow in hospitals, and tracking of motion through choke points, such as access to designated
areas. In relation to assets, tracking is most frequently applied to continuous inventory location tracking (for example for maintenance, availability when needed and
monitoring of use), and materials tracking to prevent
left-ins during surgery, such as specimen and blood
products.
4.2.2. Identiﬁcation and authentication
It includes patient identiﬁcation to reduce incidents
harmful to patients (such as wrong drug/dose/time/procedure), comprehensive and current electronic medical record maintenance (both in the in- and out-patient
settings), and infant identiﬁcation in hospitals to prevent
mismatching. In relation to staff, identiﬁcation and authentication is most frequently used to grant access and to improve employee morale by addressing patient safety
issues. In relation to assets, identiﬁcation and authentication is predominantly used to meet the requirements of
security procedures, to avoid thefts or losses of important
instruments and products.
4.2.3. Data collection
Automatic data collection and transfer is mostly aimed
at reducing form processing time, process automation

A smart environment is that making its ‘‘employment”
easy and comfortable thanks to the intelligence of contained objects, be it an ofﬁce, a home, an industrial plant,
or a leisure environment.
4.3.1. Comfortable homes and ofﬁces
Sensors and actuators distributed in houses and ofﬁces
can make our life more comfortable in several aspects:
rooms heating can be adapted to our preferences and to
the weather; the room lighting can change according to
the time of the day; domestic incidents can be avoided
with appropriate monitoring and alarm systems; and energy can be saved by automatically switching off the electrical equipments when not needed. For instance, we may
think of energy providers that use dynamically changing
energy prices to inﬂuence the overall energy consumption
in a way that smoothes load peaks. An automation logic
may optimize the power consumption costs throughout
the day by observing when the prices, which are provided
by an external web service and are set according to the current energy production and consumption, are cheap and by
considering the speciﬁc requirements of each appliances at
home (battery charger, refrigerator, ovens) [30].
4.3.2. Industrial plants
Smart environments also help in improving the automation in industrial plants with a massive deployment of
RFID tags associated to the production parts. In a generic
scenario, as production parts reach the processing point,
the tag is read by the RFID reader. An event is generated
by the reader with all the necessary data, such as the RFID
number, and stored on the network. The machine/robot
gets notiﬁed by this event (as it has subscribed to the service) and picks up the production part. By matching data
from the enterprise system and the RFID tag, it knows
how to further process the part. In parallel, a wireless sensor mounted on the machine monitors the vibration and if

2796

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

it exceeds a speciﬁc threshold an event is raised to immediately stop the process (quality control). Once such an
emergency event is propagated, devices that consume it
react accordingly. The robot receives the emergency shutdown event and immediately stops its operation. The plant
manager also immediately sees the status of the so called
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) orders, the production
progress, the device status, as well as a global view on all
the elements and the possible side effects of a production
line delay due to shop-ﬂoor device malfunctions [29].
4.3.3. Smart museum and gym
As to smart leisure environments, the museum and the
gym are two representative examples where the IoT technologies can help in exploiting their facilities at the best. In
the museum, for instance, expositions in the building may
evoke various historical periods (Egyptian period or ice
age) with widely diverging climate conditions. The building adjusts locally to these conditions while also taking
into account outdoor conditions. In the gym, the personal
trainer can upload the exercise proﬁle into the training
machine for each trainee, who is then automatically recognized by the machine through the RFID tag. Health parameters are monitored during the whole training session and
the reported values are checked to see if the trainee is
overtraining or if she/he is too relaxed when doing the
exercises.
4.4. Personal and social domain
The applications falling in this domain are those that
enable the user to interact with other people to maintain
and build social relationships. Indeed, things may automatically trigger the transmission of messages to friends
to allow them to know what we are doing or what we have
done in the past, such as moving from/to our house/ofﬁce,
travelling, meeting some common mates or playing soccer
[36]. The following are the major applications.
4.4.1. Social networking
This application is related to the automatic update of
information about our social activities in social networking
web portals, such as Twitter and Plazes. We may think of
RFIDs that generate events about people and places to give
users real-time updates in their social networks, which are
then gathered and uploaded in social networking websites.
Application user interfaces display a feed of events that
their friends have preliminarily deﬁned and the users can
control their friend lists as well as what events are disclosed to which friends.
4.4.2. Historical queries
Historical queries about objects and events data let
users study trends in their activities over time. This can
be extremely useful for applications that support longterm activities such as business projects and collaborations. A digital diary application can be built that records
and displays events for example in a Google Calendar for
later perusal. This way, users can look back over their diaries to see how and with whom they’ve spent their time.
Historical trends plots can also be automatically generated

using the Google Charts API to display where, how, and
with whom or what they have spent their time over some
arbitrary period.
4.4.3. Losses
A search engine for things is a tool that helps in ﬁnding
objects that we don’t remember where have been left. The
simplest web-based RFID application is a search engine for
things that lets users view the last recorded location for
their tagged objects or search for a particular object’s location. A more proactive extension of this application leverages user-deﬁned events to notify users when the last
recorded object location matches some conditions.
4.4.4. Thefts
An application similar to the previous one may allow
the user to know if some objects are moved from a restricted area (the owner house or ofﬁce), which would
indicate that the object is being stolen. In this case, the
event has to be notiﬁed immediately to the owner and/or
to the security guards. For example, the application can
send an SMS to the users when the stolen objects leave
the building without any authorization (such as a laptop,
a wallet or an ornament).
4.5. Futuristic applications domain
The applications described in the previous sections are
realistic as they either have been already deployed or can
be implemented in a short/medium period since the required technologies are already available. Apart from
these, we may envision many other applications, which
we herein deﬁne futuristic since these rely on some (communications, sensing, material and/or industrial processes)
technologies that either are still to come or whose implementation is still too complex. These applications are even
more interesting in terms of required research and potential impact. An interesting analysis of this kind of applications is provided by SENSEI FP7 Project [49] from which we
have taken the three most appealing applications.
4.5.1. Robot taxi
In future cities, robot taxis swarm together, moving in
ﬂocks, providing service where it is needed in a timely
and efﬁcient manner. The robot taxis respond to real-time
trafﬁc movements of the city, and are calibrated to reduce
congestion at bottlenecks in the city and to service pick-up
areas that are most frequently used. With or without a human driver, they weave in and out of trafﬁc at optimum
speeds, avoiding accidents through proximity sensors,
which repel them magnetically from other objects on the
road. They can be hailed from the side of the street by
pointing a mobile phone at them or by using hand gestures. The user’s location is automatically tracked via GPS
and enables users to request a taxi to be at a certain location at a particular time by just pointing it out on a detailed
map. On the rare occasions they are not in use, the taxis
head for ‘pit-stops’ where they automatically stack themselves into tight bays which are instrumented with sensors
where actuators set off recharging batteries, perform simple maintenance tasks and clean the cars. The pit-stops

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

communicate with each other to ensure no over or underutilization [49].
4.5.2. City information model
The idea of a City Information Model (CIM) is based on
the concept that the status and performance of each buildings and urban fabrics – such as pedestrian walkways, cycle paths and heavier infrastructure like sewers, rail lines,
and bus corridors – are continuously monitored by the city
government operates and made available to third parties
via a series of APIs, even though some information is conﬁdential. Accordingly, nothing can be built legally unless it
is compatible with CIM. The facilities management services
communicate with each other and the CIM, sharing energy
in the most cost-effective and resource-efﬁcient fashion.
They automatically trade surplus energy with each other
and prices are calculated to match supply and demand.
In this sense, planning and design is an ongoing social process, in which the performance of each item is being reported in real-time and compared with others.
Population changes can be inferred, as can movement patterns, environmental performance, as well as the overall
efﬁciency of products and buildings.
4.5.3. Enhanced game room
The enhanced game room as well as the players are
equipped with a variety of devices to sense location,
movement, acceleration, humidity, temperature, noise,
voice, visual information, heart rate and blood pressure.
The room uses this information to measure excitement
and energy levels so that to control the game activity
according to status of the player. Various objects are also
placed throughout the room and the point of the game is
to crawl and jump from one to the other without touching the ﬂoor. Points are awarded for long jumps and difﬁcult places to reach. The game also puts a target on the
wall-mounted screen. Whoever reaches that target ﬁrst,
wins. As the players work their way around the room,

2797

the game keeps track of their achievements. Their controller recognizes RFID tags on objects in the room. To
score, they have to touch the object with it. As the game
progresses, the system gradually makes it more difﬁcult.
At ﬁrst the objects they have to reach are nearby and easy
to reach. At some point it gets too difﬁcult and both players must touch the ﬂoor with their feet. Then the game
makes a loud noise to indicate that this was wrong. The
room now notices that one player is a bit taller and faster
than the other so it starts putting the objects a bit closer
to him, so that he can keep up. The game then adapts the
difﬁculty level and the target according to the achievements of the players so that to keep high the excitement
level perceived by the console through the sensing
devices.
5. Open issues
Although the enabling technologies described in Section
3 make the IoT concept feasible, a large research effort is
still required. In this section, we ﬁrstly review the standardization activities that are being carried out on different
IoT-related technologies (Section 5.1). Secondly, we show
the most important research issues that need to be addressed to meet the requirements characterizing IoT scenarios. More speciﬁcally, in Section 5.2 we focus on
addressing and networking issues, whereas in Section 5.3
we describe the problems related to security and privacy.
In Table 2 we summarize the open research issues, the
causes for which they are speciﬁcally crucial for IoT scenarios and the sections when such issues will be discussed in
detail.
5.1. Standardization activity
Several contributions to the full deployment and standardization of the IoT paradigm are coming from the scientiﬁc community. Among them, the most relevant are

Table 2
Open research issues.
Open issue

Brief description of the cause

Details in

Standards
Mobility support

There are several standardization efforts but they are not integrated in a comprehensive framework
There are several proposals for object addressing but none for mobility support in the IoT scenario,
where scalability and adaptability to heterogeneous technologies represent crucial problems
Object Name Servers (ONS) are needed to map a reference to a description of a speciﬁc object and the
related identiﬁer, and vice versa
Existing transport protocols fail in the IoT scenarios since their connection setup and congestion control
mechanisms may be useless; furthermore, they require excessive buffering to be implemented in objects
The IoT will generate data trafﬁc with patterns that are expected to be signiﬁcantly different from those
observed in the current Internet. Accordingly, it will also be necessary to deﬁne new QoS requirements
and support schemes
Authentication is difﬁcult in the IoT as it requires appropriate authentication infrastructures that will
not be available in IoT scenarios. Furthermore, things have scarce resources when compared to current
communication and computing devices. Also man-in-the-middle attack is a serious problem
This is usually ensured by protecting data with passwords. However, the password lengths supported by
IoT technologies are in most cases too short to provide strong levels of protection
A lot of private information about a person can be collected without the person being aware. Control on
the diffusion of all such information is impossible with current techniques
All the information collected about a person by the IoT may be retained indeﬁnitely as the cost of
storage decreases. Also data mining techniques can be used to easily retrieve any information even after
several years

Section 5.1
Section 5.2

Naming
Transport protocol
Trafﬁc characterization
and QoS support
Authentication

Data integrity
Privacy
Digital forgetting

Section 5.2
Section 5.2
Section 5.2

Section 5.3

Section 5.3
Section 5.3
Section 5.3

2798

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

provided by the different sections of the Auto-ID Lab scattered all over the world [50,51,34], by the European Commission [52] and European Standards Organisations (ETSI,
CEN, CENELEC, etc.), by their international counterparts
(ISO, ITU), and by other standards bodies and consortia
(IETF, EPCglobal, etc.). Inputs are particularly expected
from the Machine-to-Machine Workgroup of the European
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) and from
some Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) Working
Groups. 6LoWPAN [53], aiming at making the IPv6 protocol
compatible with low capacity devices, and ROLL [54], more
interested in the routing issue for Internet of the Future
scenarios, are the best candidates.
In Table 3 we summarize the fundamental characteristics of the main standards of interest in terms of objectives
of the standard, status of the standardization process, communication range, data rate, and cost of devices. In the table we highlight the standards that are discussed in detail
in this section.
With regards to the RFID technology, it is currently slowed down by fragmented efforts towards standardization,
which is focusing on a couple of principal areas: RFID frequency and readers-tags (tags-reader) communication
protocols, data formats placed on tags and labels. The major standardization bodies dealing with RFID systems are
EPCglobal, ETSI, and ISO.
More speciﬁcally, EPCglobal is a subsidiary of the global
not-for-proﬁt standards organization GS1. It mainly aims
at supporting the global adoption of a unique identiﬁer
for each tag, which is called Electronic Product Code
(EPC), and related industry-driven standards. The production of a recommendation for the ‘‘EPCglobal Architecture
Framework” is a EPCglobal objective, shared with a community of experts and several organizations, including
Auto-ID Labs, GS1 Global Ofﬁce, GS1 Member Organizations, government agencies, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs). Interesting results are already available
[5].
As for the European Commission efforts, the event that
might have the strongest inﬂuence on the future RFID standardization process is undoubtedly the ofﬁcial constitution

of the so called ‘‘Informal working group on the implementation of the RFID”. This is composed of stakeholders
(industry, operators, European standard organisations, civil
society organisations, data protection authorities, etc.)
required ‘‘to be familiar with RFID in general, the Data Protection Directive and the RFID Recommendation”.
One of these stakeholders, CEN (European Committee
for Standardization) [55], although does not conduct any
activity speciﬁcally related to the IoT, is interested in RFID
evolution towards IoT. Among its Working Groups (WGs),
the most relevant to the IoT are WG 1-4 BARCODES, WG
5 RFID, and the Global RFID Interoperability Forum for
Standards (GRIFS). This latter is a two-year-project coordinated by GS1, ETSI, and CEN and aimed at deﬁning standards related to physical objects (readers, tags, sensors),
communications infrastructures, spectrum for RFID use,
privacy and security issues affecting RFID [56].
Differently from these projects, ISO [57] focuses on
technical issues such as the frequencies utilized, the modulation schemes, and the anti-collision protocol.
With regards to the IoT paradigm at large, a very interesting standardization effort is now starting in ETSI [58]
(the European Telecommunications Standards Institute,
which produces globally-applicable ICT related standards). Within ETSI, in fact, the Machine-to-Machine
(M2M) Technical Committee was launched, to the purpose of conducting standardization activities relevant to
M2M systems and sensor networks (in the view of the
IoT). M2M is a real leading paradigm towards IoT, but
there is very little standardization for it, while the multiplicity of the solutions on the market use standard Internet, Cellular, and Web technologies. Therefore, the goals
of the ETSI M2M committee include: the development
and the maintenance of an end-to-end architecture for
M2M (with end-to-end IP philosophy behind it), strengthening the standardization efforts on M2M, including sensor network integration, naming, addressing, location,
QoS, security, charging, management, application, and
hardware interfaces [59].
As for the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) activities related to the IoT, we can say that recently the IPv6

Table 3
Characteristics of the most relevant standardization activities.
Standard

Objective

Standardization activities discussed in this section
EPCglobal Integration of RFID technology into the electronic product code (EPC) framework,
which allows for sharing of information related to products
GRIFS
European Coordinated Action aimed at deﬁning RFID standards supporting the
transition from localized RFID applications to the Internet of Things
M2M
Deﬁnition of cost-effective solutions for machine-to-machine (M2M)
communications, which should allow the related market to take off
6LoWPAN Integration of low-power IEEE 802.15.4 devices into IPv6 networks
ROLL
Deﬁnition of routing protocols for heterogeneous low-power and lossy networks
Other relevant standardization activities
NFC
Deﬁnition of a set of protocols for low range and bidirectional communications
Wireless
Deﬁnition of protocols for self-organizing, self-healing and mesh architectures over
Hart
IEEE 802.15.4 devices
ZigBee
Enabling reliable, cost-effective, low-power, wirelessly networked, monitoring and
control products

Status

Comm.
range (m)

Data rate
(kbps)

Unitary
cost ($)

Advanced

1

102

0.01

Ongoing

1

102

0.01

Ongoing

N.S.

N.S.

N.S.

Ongoing
Ongoing

10–100
N.S.

102
N.S.

1
N.S.

Advanced
Advanced

102
10–100

Up to 424
102

0.1
1

Advanced

10–100

102

1

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

over Low-Power Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPAN) IETF group was born [53]. 6LoWPAN is deﬁning a
set of protocols that can be used to integrate sensor nodes
into IPv6 networks. Core protocols composing the 6LoWPAN architecture have been already speciﬁed and some
commercial products have been already released that
implement this protocol suite. The 6LoWPAN working
group is currently moving four Internet-Drafts towards last
call in the standards track (Improved Header Compression,
6LoWPAN Neighbour Discovery) and informational track
(Use Cases, Routing Requirements) [60].
A further relevant IETF Working Group is named Routing Over Low power and Lossy networks (ROLL). It has recently produced the RPL (pronounced ‘‘ripple”) routing
protocol draft. This will be the basis for routing over lowpower and lossy networks including 6LoWPAN, which still
needs lots of contributions to reach a full solution.
We clearly understand, from what is described above,
that an emerging idea is to consider the IoT standardisation
as an integral part of the Future Internet deﬁnition and
standardisation process. This assertion was recently made
by the cluster of European R&D projects on the IoT
(CERP-IoT). According to it, the integration of different
things into wider networks, either mobile or ﬁxed, will allow their interconnection with the Future Internet [61].
What is worth pointing out in the cited standardization
areas is the tight collaboration between standardization
Institutions and other world-wide Interest Groups and Alliances. It seems that the whole industry is willing to cooperate on achieving the IoT. IPSO, but also the ZigBee
Alliance, the IETF and the IEEE work in the same direction
of IP standards integration [61].
5.2. Addressing and networking issues
The IoT will include an incredibly high number of
nodes, each of which will produce content that should be
retrievable by any authorized user regardless of her/his position. This requires effective addressing policies. Currently, the IPv4 protocol identiﬁes each node through a
4-byte address. It is well known that the number of available IPv4 addresses is decreasing rapidly and will soon
reach zero. Therefore, it is clear that other addressing policies should be used other than that utilized by IPv4.
In this context, as we already said in Section 5.1, IPv6
addressing has been proposed for low-power wireless
communication nodes within the 6LoWPAN context. IPv6
addresses are expressed by means of 128 bits and therefore, it is possible to deﬁne 1038 addresses, which should
be enough to identify any object which is worth to be addressed. Accordingly, we may think to assign an IPv6 address to all the things included in the network. However,
since RFID tags use 64–96 bit identiﬁers, as standardized
by EPCglobal, solutions are required for enabling the
addressing of RFID tags into IPv6 networks. Recently, integration of RFID tags into IPv6 networks has been investigated [62] and methodologies to integrate RFID
identiﬁers and IPv6 addresses have been proposed. For
example, in [63] authors propose to use the 64 bits of the
interface identiﬁer of the IPv6 address to report the RFID
tag identiﬁer, whereas the other 64 bits of the network

2799

preﬁx are used to address the gateway between the RFID
system and the Internet.
Accordingly, the gateway will handle messages generated by RFID tags that must leave the RFID system and enter the Internet as follows. A new IPv6 packet will be
created. Its payload will contain the message generated
by the tag, whereas its source address will be created by
concatenating the gateway ID (which is copied into the
network preﬁx part of the IPv6 address) and the RFID tag
identiﬁer (which is copied into the interface identiﬁer part
of the IPv6 address). Analogously, the gateway will handle
IPv6 packets coming from the Internet and directed towards a certain RFID tag as follows. The speciﬁc RFID tag,
which represents the destination of the message, will be
easily recognized as its identiﬁer is reported into the interface identiﬁer part of the IPv6 address; the speciﬁc message (which in most cases represents the request of a
certain operation) will be, instead, notiﬁed to the relevant
RFID reader(s).
This approach, however, cannot be used if the RFID tag
identiﬁer is long 96 bits, as allowed by the EPCglobal standard. To solve this problem, in [64] a methodology is proposed that uses an appropriate network element, called
agent, that maps the RFID identiﬁer (regardless of its
length) into a 64 bits ﬁeld which will be used as the interface ID of the IPv6 address. Obviously, the agent must keep
updated a mapping between the IPv6 addresses generated
and the RFID tag identiﬁer.
A complete different approach is illustrated in [65],
where the RFID message and headers are included into
the IPv6 packet payload as shown in Fig. 4.
It is important to note, however, that in all the above
cases RFID mobility is not supported. In fact, the common
basic assumption is that each RFID can be reached through
a given gateway between the network and the RFID system.
It follows that appropriate mechanisms are required to
support mobility in the IoT scenarios. In this contexts, the
overall system will be composed of a large number of subsystems with extremely different characteristics. In the
past, several solutions have been proposed for the mobility
management [66]; however, their validity in the IoT scenarios should be proven as they may have problems in
terms of scalability and adaptability to be applied in such
a heterogeneous environment. To this purpose it is important to note that higher scalability can be achieved by solutions based on the utilization of a home agent (like Mobile
IP [67]), rather than by solutions based on home location
registers (HLR) and visitor location registers (VLR), which
are widely used in cellular networks. In fact, Mobile IP-like
protocols do not use central servers, which are critical from
a scalability point of view.
Another issue regards the way in which addresses are
obtained. In the traditional Internet any host address is
identiﬁed by querying appropriate servers called domain
name servers (DNS). Objective of DNSs is to provide the
IP address of a host from a certain input name. In the
IoT, communications are likely to occur between (or
with) objects instead of hosts. Therefore, the concept of
Object Name Service (ONS) must be introduced, which
associates a reference to a description of the speciﬁc object and the related RFID tag identiﬁer [68,5]. In fact, the

2800

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

Fig. 4. Encapsulation of RFID message into an IPv6 packet.

tag identiﬁer is mapped into a Internet Uniform Reference
Locator (URL), which points to relevant information of
the object. In the IoT, the ONS should operate in both
directions, i.e., should be able to associate the description
of the object speciﬁed to a given RFID tag identiﬁer, and
vice versa. Inverting the function is not easy and requires
an appropriate service, which is called Object Code Mapping Service (OCMS). Desired characteristics for OCMSs
are reported in [69], where a P2P approach is suggested
in order to improve scalability. However, note that design and assessment of OCMS in complex operational
environments, such as the IoT, are still open issues.
Also a new conception of the transport layer is required
for the IoT. Major goals of the transport layer are to guarantee end-to-end reliability and to perform end-to-end
congestion control. In the traditional Internet, the protocol
utilized at the transport layer for reliable communications
is the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) [70]. It is obvious
that TCP is inadequate for the IoT, due to the following
reasons:
1. Connection setup: TCP is connection oriented and each
session begins with a connection setup procedure (the
so called three ways handshake). This is unnecessary,
given that most of the communications within the IoT
will involve the exchange of a small amount of data
and, therefore, the setup phase would last for a considerable portion of the session time. Furthermore, the
connection setup phase involves data to be processed
and transmitted by end-terminals, which in most cases
are limited in terms of both energy and communication
resources, such as sensor nodes and RFID tags.
2. Congestion control: TCP is responsible of performing
end-to-end congestion control. In the IoT this may cause
performance problems as most of the communications
will exploit the wireless medium, which is known to
be a challenging environment for TCP [71]. Furthermore,
if the amount of data to be exchanged in a single session
is very small, TCP congestion control is useless, given
that the whole TCP session will be concluded with the
transmission of the ﬁrst segment and the consequent
reception of the corresponding acknowledgement.
3. Data buffering: TCP requires data to be stored in a memory buffer both at the source and at the destination. In
fact, at the source data should be buffered so that it

can be retransmitted in case it is lost. At the destination
data should be buffered to provide ordered delivery of
data to the application. Management of such buffers
may be too costly in terms of required energy for battery-less devices.
As a consequence, TCP cannot be used efﬁciently for the
end-to-end transmission control in the IoT. Up to date,
no solutions have been proposed for the IoT and therefore,
research contributions are required.
Furthermore, we do not know what will be the characteristics of the trafﬁc exchanged by smart objects in the
IoT. Whereas it is fundamental to investigate such characteristics as they should be the basis for the design of the
network infrastructures and protocols.
Accordingly, another important research issue concerning the networking aspects is related to trafﬁc characterization. It is well known that trafﬁc characteristics in
wireless sensor networks strongly depend on the application scenario (see [72], for example). This was not a problem as the interest was focused on the trafﬁc ﬂow inside
the wireless sensor network itself. Complications arise
when, according to the IoT paradigm, sensor nodes become
part of the overall Internet. In fact, in this scenario, the
Internet will be traversed by a large amount of data generated by sensor networks deployed for heterogeneous purposes and thus, with extremely different trafﬁc
characteristics. Furthermore, since the deployment of large
scale and distributed RFID systems are still at the very
beginning, the characteristics of the related trafﬁc ﬂows
have not been studied so far, and therefore, the trafﬁc
which will traverse the IoT is completely unknown.
On the contrary characterization of the trafﬁc is very
important as it is necessary to network providers for planning the expansion of their infrastructures (if needed).
Finally, trafﬁc characterization and modeling together
with a list of trafﬁc requirements is needed to devise
appropriate solutions for supporting quality of service
(QoS). In fact, if some work has been done for supporting
QoS in wireless sensor networks [73], the problem is still
completely unexplored in RFID systems. Accordingly, a
large research effort is needed in the ﬁeld of QoS support
in the IoT. We believe that there will be several analogies
with QoS for machine-to-machine communications.
Since such types of communications have been already

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

addressed in recent years [74], we can apply to the IoT scenarios QoS management schemes proposed for M2M scenarios. Obviously, this should be just a starting point and
speciﬁc solutions for the IoT should be introduced in the
future.
5.3. Security and privacy
People will resist the IoT as long as there is no public
conﬁdence that it will not cause serious threats to privacy.
All the talking and complains (see [75] for example) following the announcement by the Italian retailer Benetton
on the plan to tag a complete line of clothes (around 15
million RFIDs) has been the ﬁrst, clear conﬁrmation of this
mistrust towards the use that will be done of the data collected by the IoT technologies [76].
Public concerns are indeed likely to focus on a certain
number of security and privacy issues [21,77].
5.3.1. Security
The IoT is extremely vulnerable to attacks for several
reasons. First, often its components spend most of the time
unattended; and thus, it is easy to physically attack them.
Second, most of the communications are wireless, which
makes eavesdropping extremely simple. Finally, most of
the IoT components are characterized by low capabilities
in terms of both energy and computing resources (this is
especially the case for passive components) and thus, they
cannot implement complex schemes supporting security.
More speciﬁcally, the major problems related to security concern authentication and data integrity. Authentication is difﬁcult as it usually requires appropriate
authentication infrastructures and servers that achieve
their goal through the exchange of appropriate messages
with other nodes. In the IoT such approaches are not feasible given that passive RFID tags cannot exchange too many
messages with the authentication servers. The same reasoning applies (in a less restrictive way) to the sensor
nodes as well.
In this context, note that several solutions have been
proposed for sensor networks in the recent past [78]. However, existing solutions can be applied when sensor nodes
are considered as part of a sensor network connected to the
rest of the Internet via some nodes playing the roles of
gateways. In the IoT scenarios, instead, sensor nodes must
be seen as nodes of the Internet, so that it becomes necessary to authenticate them even from nodes not belonging
to the same sensor network.
In the last few years, some solutions have been proposed for RFID systems, however, they all have serious
problems as described in [21].
Finally, none of the existing solutions can help in solving the proxy attack problem, also known as the man-inthe-middle attack. Consider the case in which a node is
utilized to identify something or someone and, accordingly, provides access to a certain service or a certain area
(consider an electronic passport for example, or some keys
based on RFID). The attack depicted in Fig. 5 could be successfully performed.
Consider the case in which A is the node that wants to
authenticate other system elements through some RF

2801

mechanism and that an attacker wants to stole the identity
of the element B (please note that that B can be any IoT element capable of computing and communicating). The attacker will position two transceivers. The ﬁrst close to A,
which we call B0 and the second close to B, which we call
A0 . The basic idea is to make A believe that B0 is B, and make
B believe that A0 is A. To this purpose, node B0 will transmit
the query signal received by the authenticating node A to
the transceiver A0 . The transceiver A0 will transmit such signal so that B can receive it. Observe, that the signal transmitted by A0 is an exact replica of the signal transmitted by
A. Accordingly, it is impossible for node B to understand
that the signal was not transmitted by A and therefore, it
will reply with its identiﬁcation. Node A0 receives such reply and transmits it to node B0 , that will transmit it to node
A. Node A cannot distinguish that such reply was not transmitted by B, and therefore, will identify the transceiver B0
as the element B and provide access accordingly. Observe
that this can be done regardless of the fact that the signal
is encrypted or not.
Data integrity solutions should guarantee that an adversary cannot modify data in the transaction without the system detecting the change. The problem of data integrity
has been extensively studied in all traditional computing
and communication systems and some preliminary results
exist for sensor networks, e.g., [79]. However, new problems arise when RFID systems are integrated in the Internet as they spend most of the time unattended. Data can
be modiﬁed by adversaries while it is stored in the node
or when it traverses the network [80]. To protect data
against the ﬁrst type of attack, memory is protected in
most tag technologies and solutions have been proposed
for wireless sensor networks as well [81]. For example,
both EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2 and ISO/IEC 18000–3
tags protect both read and write operations on their memory with a password. In fact, EPCglobal Class-1 Generation-2
tags have ﬁve areas of memory, each of which can be protected in read or write with a password independently of
each others. Whereas, ISO/18000–3 tags deﬁne a pointer
to a memory address and protect with a password all
memory areas with a lower memory address. To protect
data against the second type of attack, messages may be
protected according to the Keyed-Hash Message Authentication Code (HMAC) scheme [82]. This is based on a common

Fig. 5. Man in the middle attack.

2802

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

secret key shared between the tag and the destination of
the message, which is used in combination with a hash
function to provide authentication.
Observe that the above solutions proposed to support
data integrity when RFID systems are considered have serious problems. In fact, the password length supported by
most tag technologies is too short to provide strong levels
of protections. Moreover, even if longer passwords are supported, still their management remains a challenging task,
especially when entities belonging to different organizations, as in the case of the IoT, are involved.
Finally, please note that that all the solutions proposed
to support security use some cryptographic methodologies. Typical cryptographic algorithms spend large amount
of resources in terms of energy and bandwidth both at the
source and the destination. Such solutions cannot be applied to the IoT, given that they will include elements (like
RFID tags and sensor nodes) that are seriously constrained
in terms of energy, communications, and computation
capabilities. It follows that new solutions are required able
to provide a satisfactory level of security regardless of the
scarcity of resources. In this context, a few solutions have
been proposed for light symmetric key cryptographic
schemes (see [83,84] for RFID scenarios and [78] for sensor
network scenarios). However, as we already said, key management schemes are still at an early stage (especially in
the case of RFID) and require large research efforts.
5.3.2 Privacy
The concept of privacy is deeply rooted into our civilizations, is recognized in all legislations of civilized countries
and, as we already said, concerns about its protection have
proven to be a signiﬁcant barrier against the diffusion of
the technologies involved in the IoT [75]. People concerns
about privacy are indeed well justiﬁed. In fact, the ways
in which data collection, mining, and provisioning will be
accomplished in the IoT are completely different from
those that we now know and there will be an amazing
number of occasions for personal data to be collected.
Therefore, for human individuals it will be impossible to
personally control the disclosure of their personal
information.
Furthermore, the cost of information storage continues
to decrease and is now approaching 109 euro per byte.
Accordingly, once information is generated, will most
probably be retained indeﬁnitely, which involves denial
of digital forgetting in people perspective.
It follows that the IoT really represents an environment
in which privacy of individuals is seriously menaced in
several ways. Furthermore, while in the traditional Internet problems of privacy arise mostly for Internet users
(individuals playing an active role), in the IoT scenarios privacy problems arise even for people not using any IoT
service.
Accordingly, privacy should be protected by ensuring
that individuals can control which of their personal data
is being collected, who is collecting such data, and when
this is happening. Furthermore, the personal data collected
should be used only in the aim of supporting authorized
services by authorized service providers; and, ﬁnally, the
above data should be stored only until it is strictly needed.

For example, consider the application scenario regarding
Comfortable homes and ofﬁces described in Section 4.3,
and focus on the case of a building where several ofﬁces
are located. In this case, some sensing capabilities will be
deployed in the environment to track position of people
and control the lighting or heating accordingly. If the tracking system is deployed only for increasing comfort of the
ofﬁces while reducing energy consumption, then, appropriate policies to protect privacy should be applied guaranteeing that:
 the tracking system does not collect information about
the position and movements of individual users but
only considers aggregate users (position and movements of people should not be linkable to their
identities);
 people are informed of the scope and the way in which
their movements are tracked by the system (taking people informed about possible leaks of their privacy is
essential and required by most legislations);
 data collected by the tracking system should be processed for the purposes of controlling the lighting and
heating and then deleted by the storage system.
To handle the data collection process appropriate solutions
are needed in all the different subsystems interacting with
human beings in the IoT. For example, in the context of traditional Internet services the W3C group has deﬁned the
Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P) [85], which provides
a language for the description of the privacy preferences
and policies and therefore, allows automatic negotiation
of the parameters concerning privacy based on the needs
of personal information for running the service and the privacy requirements set by the user. Always in the context of
traditional Internet services, through appropriate settings
of the applications run on the user terminals, the time
instants when personal information are being released
can be easily detected and the entity collecting such data
can be identiﬁed through well established authentication
procedures.
The problem becomes impossible to be solved in the
case of sensor networks. In fact, individuals entering in
an area where a sensor network is deployed cannot control what information is being collected about themselves. For example, consider a sensor network
composed of cameras deployed in a certain area. The
only way an individual can avoid such cameras not to
take her/his image is not to enter into the area. In this
context, a possible solution that can reduce privacy problems might be to restrict the network’s ability to gather
data at a detail level that could compromise privacy [86].
For example, a sensor network might anonymize data by
reporting only approximate locations of sensed individuals and tradeoff privacy requirements with the level of
details required by the application. Another example
regarding sensor networks composed of cameras deployed for video surveillance purposes. In this case,
images of people can be blurred in order to protect their
privacy [87]. If some event occurs, then the image of relevant people can be reconstructed by the law enforcement personnel.

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

In the case of RFID systems, the problem is twofold. In
fact, on the one hand usually RFID tags are passive and reply to readers queries regardless of the desire of their proprietary. On the other hand an attacker can eavesdrop the
reply from a tag to another authorized reader. Solutions to
the ﬁrst type of problems proposed so far are based on
authentication of authorized readers (which have been discussed above). However, such solutions require tags that
are able to perform authentication procedures. This involves higher costs and an authentication infrastructure,
which, as we have already said, cannot be deployed in
complex systems like those expected in IoT scenarios.
Accordingly, solutions have been recently proposed (see
[88] for example) that use a new system that, on the basis
of preferences set by the user, negotiates privacy on her/his
behalf. The privacy decisions taken by the above system
can be enforced by creating collisions in the wireless channel with the replies transmitted by the RFID tags, which
should not be read [89].
Avoiding eavesdropping by attacker in RFID systems
can be accomplished through protecting the communication with encryption as explained above. However, these
types of solutions still allow malicious readers to detect
the presence of the RFID tags scanned by the authorized
reader. To ﬁx this problem, there is a new family of solutions in which the signal transmitted by the reader has
the form of a pseudo-noise. Such noisy signal is modulated
by the RFID tags and therefore, its transmission cannot be
detected by malicious readers [90].
In order to ensure that the personal data collected is
used only to support authorized services by authorized
providers, solutions have been proposed that usually rely
on a system called privacy broker [91]. The proxy interacts with the user on the one side and with the services
on the other. Accordingly, it guarantees that the provider
obtains only the information about the user which is
strictly needed. The user can set the preferences of the
proxy. When sensor networks and RFID systems are included in the network, then the proxy operates between
them and the services. However, note that in this case
the individual cannot set and control the policies utilized
by the privacy brokers. Moreover, observe that such
solutions based on privacy proxies suffer from scalability
problems.
Finally, studies are still at the beginning regarding digital forgetting as this has been recognized as an important
issue only recently [92]. In fact, as the cost of storage decreases, the amount of data that can be memorized increases dramatically. Accordingly, there is the need to
create solutions that periodically delete information that
is of no use for the purpose it was generated. Accordingly,
the new software tools that will be developed in the future
should support such forgetting functionalities. For example, a few experimental solutions have been developed
and released for public use in the recent past that allow
users to insert and share pictures and other types of ﬁles
over the Internet with the assurance that such pictures will
expire at a certain date and will be deleted afterwards (see
drop.io and the Guest Pass features on Flickr for example
[93]). Porting of such solutions to the IoT context is not
straightforward and requires further research effort.

2803

6. Conclusions
The Internet has changed drastically the way we live,
moving interactions between people at a virtual level in
several contexts spanning from the professional life to
social relationships. The IoT has the potential to add a
new dimension to this process by enabling communications with and among smart objects, thus leading to
the vision of ‘‘anytime, anywhere, anymedia, anything”
communications.
To this purpose, we observe that the IoT should be considered as part of the overall Internet of the future, which
is likely to be dramatically different from the Internet we
use today. In fact, it is clear that the current Internet paradigm, which supports and has been built around host-tohost communications, is now a limiting factor for the
current use of the Internet. It has become clear that Internet is mostly used for the publishing and retrieving of
information (regardless of the host where such information is published or retrieved from) and therefore, information should be the focus of communication and networking
solutions. This leads to the concept of data-centric networks, which has been investigated only recently [94].
According to such a concept, data and the related queries
are self-addressable and self-routable.
In this perspective, the current trend, which we have
highlighted in Section 5.2, of assigning an IPv6 address to
each IoT element so as to make it possible to reach them
from any other node of the network, looks more suitable
for the traditional Internet paradigm. Therefore, it is possible that the Internet evolution will require a change in the
above trend.
Another interesting paradigm which is emerging in the
Internet of the Future context is the so called Web Squared,
which is an evolution of the Web 2.0. It is aimed at integrating web and sensing technologies [95] together so as
to enrich the content provided to users. This is obtained
by taking into account the information about the user context collected by the sensors (microphone, cameras, GPS,
etc.) deployed in the user terminals. In this perspective, observe that Web Squared can be considered as one of the
applications running over the IoT, like the Web is today
an (important) application running over the Internet.
In this paper, we have surveyed the most important aspects of the IoT with emphasis on what is being done and
what are the issues that require further research. Indeed,
current technologies make the IoT concept feasible but
do not ﬁt well with the scalability and efﬁciency requirements they will face. We believe that, given the interest
shown by industries in the IoT applications, in the next
years addressing such issues will be a powerful driving factor for networking and communication research in both
industrial and academic laboratories.
References
[1] D. Giusto, A. Iera, G. Morabito, L. Atzori (Eds.), The Internet of Things,
Springer, 2010. ISBN: 978-1-4419-1673-0.
[2] National Intelligence Council, Disruptive Civil Technologies – Six
Technologies with Potential Impacts on US Interests Out to 2025 –
Conference Report CR 2008-07, April 2008, <http://www.dni.gov/
nic/NIC_home.html>.

2804

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805

[3] INFSO D.4 Networked Enterprise & RFID INFSO G.2 Micro &
Nanosystems, in: Co-operation with the Working Group RFID of
the ETP EPOSS, Internet of Things in 2020, Roadmap for the Future,
Version 1.1, 27 May 2008.
[4] Auto-Id Labs, <http://www.autoidlabs.org/>.
[5] The EPCglobal Architecture Framework, EPCglobal Final Version 1.3,
Approved 19 March 2009, <www.epcglobalinc.org>.
[6] K. Sakamura, Challenges in the age of ubiquitous computing: a case
study of T-engine – an open development platform for embedded
systems, in: Proceedings of ICSE’06, Shanghai, China, May 2006.
[7] M. Presser, A. Gluhak, The Internet of Things: Connecting the Real
World with the Digital World, EURESCOM mess@ge – The Magazine
for Telecom Insiders, vol. 2, 2009, <http://www.eurescom.eu/
message>.
[8] M. Botterman, for the European Commission Information Society
and Media Directorate General, Networked Enterprise & RFID Unit –
D4, Internet of Things: An Early Reality of the Future Internet, Report
of the Internet of Things Workshop, Prague, Czech Republic, May
2009.
[9] B. Sterling, Shaping Things – Mediawork Pamphlets, The MIT Press,
2005.
[10] ITU Internet Reports, The Internet of Things, November 2005.
[11] A. Dunkels, J.P. Vasseur, IP for Smart Objects, Internet Protocol for
Smart Objects (IPSO) Alliance, White Paper #1, September 2008,
<http://www.ipso-alliance.org>.
[12] J. Hui, D. Culler, S. Chakrabarti, 6LoWPAN: Incorporating IEEE
802.15.4 Into the IP Architecture – Internet Protocol for Smart
Objects (IPSO) Alliance, White Paper #3, January 2009, <http://
www.ipso-alliance.org>.
[13] N. Gershenfeld, R. Krikorian, D. Cohen, The internet of things,
Scientiﬁc American 291 (4) (2004) 76–81.
[14] I. Toma, E. Simperl, Graham Hench, A joint roadmap for semantic
technologies and the internet of things, in: Proceedings of the Third
STI Roadmapping Workshop, Crete, Greece, June 2009.
[15] A. Katasonov, O. Kaykova, O. Khriyenko, S. Nikitin, V. Terziyan,
Smart semantic middleware for the internet of things, in:
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Informatics
in Control, Automation and Robotics, Funchal, Madeira, Portugal,
May 2008.
[16] W. Wahlster, Web 3.0: Semantic Technologies for the Internet of
Services and of Things, Lecture at the 2008 Dresden Future Forum,
June 2008.
[17] I. Vázquez, Social Devices: Semantic Technology for the Internet of
Things, Week@ESI, Zamudio, Spain, June 2009.
[18] D. Guinard, T. Vlad, Towards the web of things: web mashups for
embedded devices, in: Proceedings of the International World Wide
Web Conference 2009 (WWW 2009), Madrid, Spain, April 2009.
[19] L. Srivastava, Pervasive, ambient, ubiquitous: the magic of radio, in:
European Commission Conference ‘‘From RFID to the Internet of
Things”, Bruxelles, Belgium, March 2006.
[20] K. Finkenzeller, RFID Handbook, Wiley, 2003.
[21] A. Jules, RFID security and privacy: a research survey, IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications 24 (2) (2006) 381–394.
[22] I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, E. Cayirci, Wireless
sensor networks: a survey, Computer Networks 38 (4) (2002) 393–
422.
[23] <http://ieee802.org/15>.
[24] G. Marrocco, C. Occhiuzzi, F. Amato, Sensor-oriented passive RFID,
in: Proceedings of TIWDC 2009, Pula, Italy, September 2009.
[25] <http://seattle.intel-research.net/wisp/>.
[26] M. Buettner, B. Greenstein, A. Sample, J.R. Smith, D. Wetherall,
Revisiting smart dust with RFID sensor networks, in: Proceedings of
ACM HotNets 2008, Calgary, Canada, October 2008.
[27] S. De Deugd, R. Carroll, K. Kelly, B. Millett, J. Ricker, SODA: service
oriented device architecture, IEEE Pervasive Computing 5 (3) (2006)
94–96.
[28] J. Pasley, How BPEL and SOA are changing web services
development, IEEE Internet Computing 9 (3) (2005) 60–67.
[29] P. Spiess, S. Karnouskos, D. Guinard, D. Savio, O. Baecker, L. Souza, V.
Trifa, SOA-based integration of the internet of things in enterprise
services, in: Proceedings of IEEE ICWS 2009, Los Angeles, Ca, USA,
July 2009.
[30] C. Buckl, S. Sommer, A. Scholz, A. Knoll, A. Kemper, J. Heuer, A.
Schmitt, Services to the ﬁeld: an approach for resource constrained
sensor/actor networks, in: Proceedings of WAINA’09, Bradford,
United Kingdom, May 2009.
[31] OASIS, Web Services Business Process Execution Language Version
2.0,
Working
Draft,
<http://docs.oasis-open.org/wsbpel/2.0/
wsbpelspeciﬁcationdraft.pdf>.

[32] Hydra Middleware Project, FP6 European Project, <http://
www.hydramiddleware.eu>.
[33] S. Duquennoy, G. Grimaud, J.-J. Vandewalle, The web of things:
interconnecting devices with high usability and performance, in:
Proceedings of ICESS ’09, HangZhou, Zhejiang, China, May 2009.
[34] <http://www.fosstrak.org>.
[35] C. Floerkemeier, C. Roduner, M. Lampe, RFID application
development with the Accada middleware platform, IEEE System
Journal 1 (2) (2007) 82–94.
[36] E. Welbourne, L. Battle, G. Cole, K. Gould, K. Rector, S. Raymer, M.
Balazinska, G. Borriello, Building the internet of things using RFID:
the RFID ecosystem experience, IEEE Internet Computing 13 (3)
(2009) 48–55.
[37] <http://www.ist-e-sense.org>.
[38] <http://www.ist-ubisecsens.org>.
[39] R. Yuan, L. Shumin, Y. Baogang, Value Chain Oriented RFID System
Framework and Enterprise Application, Science Press, Beijing, 2007.
[40] METRO Group Future Store Initiative, <http://www.futurestore.
org/>.
[41] S. Karpischek, F. Michahelles, F. Resatsch, E. Fleisch, Mobile sales
assistant – an NFC-based product information system for
retailers, in: Proceedings of the First International Workshop on
Near Field Communications 2009, Hagenberg, Austria, February
2009.
[42] G. Broll, E. Rukzio, M. Paolucci, M. Wagner, A. Schmidt, H. Hussmann,
PERCI: pervasive service interaction with the internet of things, IEEE
Internet Computing 13 (6) (2009) 74–81.
[43] A. Ilic, T. Staake, E. Fleisch, Using sensor information to reduce the
carbon footprint of perishable goods, IEEE Pervasive Computing 8 (1)
(2009) 22–29.
[44] A. Dada, F. Thiesse, Sensor applications in the supply chain: the
example of quality-based issuing of perishables, in: Proceedings of
Internet of Things 2008, Zurich, Switzerland, May 2008.
[45] D. Reilly, M. Welsman-Dinelle, C. Bate, K. Inkpen, Just point and
click? Using handhelds to interact with paper maps, in: Proceedings
of ACM MobileHCI’05, University of Salzburg, Austria, September
2005.
[46] R. Hardy, E. Rukzio, Touch & interact: touch-based interaction of
mobile phones with displays, in: Proceedings of ACM MobileHCI ’08,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, September 2008.
[47] A.M. Vilamovska, E. Hattziandreu, R. Schindler, C. Van Oranje, H. De
Vries, J. Krapelse, RFID Application in Healthcare – Scoping and
Identifying Areas for RFID Deployment in Healthcare Delivery, RAND
Europe, February 2009.
[48] D. Niyato, E. Hossain, S. Camorlinga, Remote patient monitoring
service using heterogeneous wireless access networks: architecture
and optimization, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications
27 (4) (2009) 412–423.
[49] SENSEI FP7 Project, Scenario Portfolio, User and Context
Requirements, Deliverable 1.1, <http://www.sensei-project.eu/>.
[50] C. Floerkemeier, R. Bhattacharyya, S. Sarma, Beyond RFID, in:
Proceedings of TIWDC 2009, Pula, Italy, September 2009.
[51] J. Sung, T. Sanchez Lopez, D. Kim, The EPC sensor network for RFID
and WSN integration infrastructure, in: Proceedings of IEEE
PerComW’07, White Plains, NY, USA, March 2007.
[52] Commission of the European Communities, Early Challenges
Regarding the ‘‘Internet of Things”, 2008.
[53] N. Kushalnagar, G. Montenegro, C. Schumacher, IPv6 Over LowPower Wireless Personal Area Networks (6LoWPANs): Overview,
Assumptions, Problem Statement, and Goals, IETF RFC 4919, August
2007.
[54] M. Weiser, The computer for the 21st century, ACM Mobile
Computing and Communications Review 3 (3) (1999) 3–11.
[55] <http://www.cen.eu>.
[56] A. Nilssen, Security and privacy standardization in internet of things,
in: eMatch’09 – Future Internet Workshop, Oslo, Norway, September
2009.
[57] <http://www.iso.org>.
[58] <http://www.etsi.org>.
[59] Z. Shelby, ETSI M2M Standardization, March 16, 2009, <http://
zachshelby.org>.
[60] Z. Shelby, News from the 75th IETF, August 3, 2009, <http://
zachshelby.org>.
[61] G. Santucci, Internet of the future and internet of things: what is at
stake and how are we getting prepared for them? in: eMatch’09 –
Future Internet Workshop, Oslo, Norway, September 2009.
[62] Y.-W. Ma, C.-F. Lai, Y.-M. Huang, J.-L. Chen, Mobile RFID with IPv6 for
phone services, in: Proceedings of IEEE ISCE 2009, Kyoto, Japan, May
2009.

L. Atzori et al. / Computer Networks 54 (2010) 2787–2805
[63] S.-D. Lee, M.-K. Shin, H.-J. Kim, EPC vs. IPv6 mapping mechanism, in:
Proceedings of Ninth International Conference on Advanced
Communication Technology, Phoenix Park, South Korea, February
2007.
[64] D.G. Yoo, D.H. Lee, C.H. Seo, S.G. Choi, RFID networking mechanism
using address management agent, in: Proceedings of NCM 2008,
Gyeongju, South Korea, September 2008.
[65] <http://ipv6.com/articles/applications/Using-RFID-and-IPv6.htm>.
[66] I.F. Akyildiz, J. Xie, S. Mohanty, A survey on mobility management in
next generation All-IP based wireless systems, IEEE Wireless
Communications Magazine 11 (4) (2004) 16–28.
[67] C. Perkins, IP Mobility Support for IPv4, IETF RFC 3344, August 2002.
[68] M. Mealling, Auto-ID Object Name Service (ONS) v1.0, Auto-ID
Center Working Draft, August 2003.
[69] V. Krylov, A. Logvinov, D. Ponomarev, EPC Object Code Mapping
Service Software Architecture: Web Approach, MERA Networks
Publications, 2008.
[70] V. Cerf, Y. Dalal, C. Sunshine, Speciﬁcation of Internet Transmission
Control Program, IETF RFC 675, December 1974.
[71] T. V Lakshman, U. Madhow, The performance of TCP/IP for networks
with high bandwidth-delay products and random loss, IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking 5 (3) (1997) 336–350.
[72] I. Demirkol, F. Alagoz, H. Deliç, C. Ersoy, Wireless sensor networks for
intrusion detection: packet trafﬁc modeling, IEEE Communication
Letters 10 (1) (2006) 22–24.
[73] D. Chen, P.K. Varshney, QoS support in wireless sensor networks: a
survey, in: Proceedings of International Conference on Wireless
Networks 2004, Las Vegas, NE, USA, June 2004.
[74] T. Van Landegem, H. Viswanathan, Anywhere, Anytime, Immersive
Communications, Enriching Communications, vol. 2, No. 1, 2008,
<http://www2.alcatel-lucent.com/enrich/en/previous-editions/>.
[75] <http://www.boycottbenetton.com/>.
[76] Benetton to tag 15 million items, RFID Journal (March) (2003),
<http://www.rﬁdjournal.com/article/articleview/344/1/1/>.
[77] J. Bukley, From RFID to the internet of things: ﬁnal report, in:
European Commission Conference ‘‘From RFID to the Internet of
Things”, Brussels, Belgium, March 2006.
[78] L. Eschenauer, V.D. Gligor, A key-management scheme for
distributed sensor networks, in: Proceedings of the Ninth ACM
Conference on Computer and Communications Security,
Washington, DC, USA, November 2002.
[79] R. Acharya, K. Asha, Data integrity and intrusion detection in
wireless sensor networks, in: Proceedings of IEEE ICON 2008, New
Delhi, India, December 2008.
[80] T. Karygiannis, B. Eydt, G. Barber, L. Bunn, T. Phillips, Guidelines for
Securing Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) Systems, NIST Special
Publication 800-98, April 2007.
[81] R. Kumar, E. Kohler, M. Srivastava, Harbor: software-based memory
protection for sensor nodes, in: Proceedings of IPSN 2007,
Cambridge, MA, USA, April 2007.
[82] H. Krawczyk, M. Bellare, R. Canetti, HMAC: Keyed-Hashing for
Message Authentication, IETF RFC 2104, February 1997.
[83] M. Feldhofer, S. Dominikus, J. Wolkerstorfer, Strong authentication
for RFID systems using AES algorithm, in: Proceedings of Workshop
on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems, Cambridge,
MA, USA, August 2004.
[84] B. Calmels, S. Canard, M. Girault, H. Sibert, Low-cost cryptography
for privacy in RFID systems, in: Proceedings of IFIP CARIDS 2006,
Terragona, Spain, April 2006.
[85] L. Cranor, et al., The Platform for Privacy Preferences 1.1 (P3P1.1)
Speciﬁcation, W3C Working Group Note, November 2006.
[86] H. Chan, A. Perrig, Security and privacy in sensor networks, IEEE
Computer 36 (10) (2003) 103–105.
[87] J. Wickramasuriya, M. Datt, S. Mehrotra, N. Venkatasubramanian,
Privacy protecting data collection in media spaces, in: Proceedings of
ACM International Conference on Multimedia 2004, New York, NY,
USA, October 2004.
[88] C.M. Medaglia, A. Serbanati, An overview of privacy and security
issues in the internet of things, in: Proceedings of TIWDC 2009, Pula,
Italy, September 2009.
[89] O. Savry, F. Vacherand, Security and privacy protection of contactless
devices, in: Proceedings of TIWDC 2009, Pula, Italy, September 2009.
[90] O. Savry, F. Pebay-Peyroula, F. Dehmas, G. Robert, J. Reverdy, RFID
noisy reader: how to prevent from eavesdropping on the
communication? in: Proceedings of Workshop on Cryptographic
Hardware and Embedded Systems 2007, Vienna, Austria, September
2007.

2805

[91] G.V. Lioudakis, E.A. Koutsoloukas, N. Dellas, S. Kapellaki, G.N.
Prezerakos, D.I. Kaklamani, I.S. Venieris, A proxy for privacy: the
discreet box, in: EUROCON 2007, Warsaw, Poland, September 2007.
[92] V. Mayer-Schönberger, Delete: The Virtue of Forgetting in the Digital
Age, Princeton University Press, 2009.
[93] C. Thompson, 25 Ideas for 2010: Digital Forgetting, Wired UK,
November 2009.
[94] T. Koponen, M. Chawla, B.-G. Chun, A. Ermolinskiy, K.H. Kim, S.
Shenker, I. Stoica, A data-oriented (and beyond) network
architecture, in: Proceedings of ACM SIGCOMM’07, Kyoto, Japan,
August 2007.
[95] T. O’Reilly, J. Pahlka, The ‘Web Squared’ Era, Forbes, September 2009.
[96] S. Tedjini, E. Perret, V. Deepu, M. Bernier, Chipless tags, the next RFID
frontier, in: Proceedings of TIWDC 2009, Pula, Italy, September 2009.

Luigi Atzori is assistant professor at the University of Cagliari (Italy) since 2000. His main
research topics of interest are in multimedia
networking: error recovery and concealment,
IP Telephony, video streaming, network QoS
management. He has published more than 80
journal articles and refereed conference
papers. He has been awarded a Fulbright
Scholarship (11/2003–05/2004) to work on
video at the University of Arizona. He is editor
for the ACM/Springer Wireless Networks
Journal and is involved in the organization of
several International Conferences on Multimedia Networking.

Antonio Iera is a Full Professor of Telecommunications at the University ‘‘Mediterranea”
of Reggio Calabria, Italy. He graduated in
Computer Engineering at the University of
Calabria in 1991; then he received a Master
Diploma in Information Technology from
CEFRIEL/Politecnico di Milano and a Ph.D.
degree from the University of Calabria. From
1994 to 1995 he has been with Siemens AG in
Munich, Germany to participate to the RACE II
ATDMA (Advanced TDMA Mobile Access)
project under a CEC Fellowship Contract.
Since 1997 he has been with the University Mediterranea, Reggio Calabria, where he currently holds the positions of scientiﬁc coordinator of
the local Research Units of the National Group of Telecommunications
and Information Theory (GTTI) and of the National Inter-University
Consortium for Telecommunications (CNIT), Director of the ARTS – Laboratory for Advanced Research into Telecommunication Systems, and
Head of the Department DIMET. His research interests include: new
generation mobile and wireless systems, broadband satellite systems,
Internet of Things. Elevated to the IEEE Senior Member status in 2007.

Giacomo Morabito was born in Messina,
Sicily (Italy) on March 16, 1972. He received
the laurea degree in Electrical Engineering
and the Ph.D. in Electrical, Computer and
Telecommunications Engineering from the
Istituto di Informatica e Telecomunicazioni,
University of Catania, Catania (Italy), in 1996
and 2000, respectively. From November 1999
to April 2001, he was with the Broadband and
Wireless Networking Laboratory of the Georgia Institute of Technology as a Research
Engineer. Since April 2001 he is with the
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Informatica e delleTelecomunicazioni of the
University of Catania where he is currently Associate Professor. His
research interests focus on analysis and solutions for wireless networks.

