Throughput Improvement by using Dynamic Channel Selection in 2.4GHz Band of IEEE 802.11
WLAN
Kavita Mathur, Diganta Jena, Sandeep Agrawal, Suja Baburaj, Sridhar Kondabathini, Vipin Tyagi Centre for Development of Telematics, Electronic City, Phase-1 Hosur Road, Bengaluru India, 560100 Telephone: +91-80-25119001 Email: {kavitam, djena, sandeepa, suja, sridhark, vipin}@cdot.in

Abstract—IEEE 802.11 WLAN Access Points(APs) are conﬁgured in the 2.4GHz band extensively to cater for the needs of all WiFi-enabled devices. In densely populated areas this causes considerable interference amongst the APs since there are only three orthogonal channels. Downlink data throughput reduces due to co-channel and overlapping channel interference. Efﬁcient channel selection is a signiﬁcant problem due to the dynamic wireless environment. Our proposed Dynamic Channel Selection(DCS) algorithm selects the optimal channel based on the periodic scan of the environment by a co-located monitoring radio unit. Frequent switching of channels is also reduced to maintain the AP’s performance and stability. It is an innovative solution, readily applicable to the existing WLAN standard not necessitating any change in IEEE 802.11 MAC Layer. Our results show an improvement of up to 35% in the data throughput in six different real-time network scenarios.
Index Terms—Access Point(AP), Co-channel interference, Dynamic Channel Selection, IEEE 802.11, Overlapping channel interference, WiFi
I. INTRODUCTION
IEEE 802.11 WLAN deployment is widespread due to
the availability of free unlicensed band, low-cost Access
Points(APs) and enormous data demand. Infrastructure WiFi
has become popular with public hotspots providing a free
connection to the users and personal/enterprise networks being
easily accessible in urban areas. The trend of ofﬂoading high
bandwidth data from the 3G/4G network to WiFi network is
also growing. However, like any other popular technology,
WLAN has an unforeseen limitation triggered by the large-
scale usage in an area. IEEE 802.11 networks operate in 5GHz(.11a) and
2.4GHz(.11b/g) frequency bands. There are 23 orthogonal
channels in the 5GHz band and only 3 in the 2.4GHz band
[7]. The 5GHz band is less crowded and free of interference.
However, WiFi-enabled devices compatible with the 5GHz
band are less. So, in real-life scenarios, APs are generally
conﬁgured in the 2.4GHz band. Due to the limited number of
channels in this band as shown in Fig.1, new APs coming up
in a locality have to coexist in a channel already occupied
by other APs. This causes co-channel interference in that
channel and overlapping interference with adjacent channels.
A considerable interference among neighboring APs can cause

degradation in downlink data throughput. This makes dynamic channel allocation crucial for designing 2.4GHz wireless networks.
Fig. 1: IEEE 802.11 WLAN channels in 2.4GHz band
In [1], the authors suggested the use of an extra control bit in the MAC header of a control packet transmitted from interference prone station to AP, to avoid co-channel interference. In [2], the authors proposed channel utilization factor by quantifying adjacent channel interference in IEEE 802.11b/g network only. In [3], radio features are measured by all stations and reported to AP using IEEE 802.11k standard to optimize co-channel interference, but this causes some overhead and inaccuracy of measurements due to the non-centralized scan. Overlapping channel interference is considered in [4] to design an algorithm that calculates distance, transmit(Tx) power, loss and interference of nearby APs to ﬁnd possible optimal channels. Network throughput improvement in [5] is observed by considering AP as well as client interference, although it is not feasible to implement practically. In [6], the authors provided an algorithm for transmission power adjustment of APs by using the concept of cognitive radio. It eventually helps in minimizing co-channel interference, although adjacent channel interference is ignored.
In this paper, we consider both co-channel and overlapping channel interference in 2.4GHz IEEE 802.11 WLAN. We propose a simple linear algorithm that assigns the best channel based on the scan results provided by a monitoring radio present in our AP. It ensures that there is an adequate number of channel switches to maintain stability and throughput, irrespective of the environment. The underlying principle of our algorithm is attributed to the variance in channel power across the spectrum, with or without interference. The IEEE 802.11 MAC layer is unaltered in our work and hence it can be practically deployed in the existing WLAN standard. We have

978-1-5386-4646-5/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

805

ICUFN 2018

tested our algorithm in six real-time scenarios and observed an improvement in data throughput up to 35%.
This paper is divided into ﬁve sections. Section II discusses system architecture of our AP. Section III describes our proposed Dynamic Channel Selection(DCS) algorithm in detail with spectrum scan, channel selection, and channel switching decision. Performance evaluation in the real-time network along with results are available in section IV. Finally, the conclusion is available in section V.
II. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE The architecture of our AP is shown in Fig. 2. We propose two co-located radio units to be used with one host processing platform in the AP. WiFi Radio-1 is conﬁgured in Master mode to give network access to the clients while WiFi Radio-2 is conﬁgured in the Monitor mode to scan the 2.4GHz band. Both the WiFi Radios should have RF antennas with same characteristics so that their coverage areas superimpose. Our DCS algorithm is executed on the host processor. WiFi Radio2 scans the 2.4GHz band passively at regular intervals. It provides scan results to the host processor, where our DCS algorithm selects the optimal channel and takes the decision of channel switch of WiFi Radio-1. WiFi Radio-2 does accurate channel scanning and power measurement of interfering APs since the channel characteristics remain same for both the co-located radios. It does passive scanning without affecting the processing of WiFi Radio-1. Popular mechanisms scan through clients or any reference AP and send the measurements to the AP. Messages exchanged in the wireless network may suffer from path loss apart from causing additional overhead. MAC changes are suggested to exchange these messages, but our algorithm does not need any such change by the usage of WiFi Radio-2.
Fig. 2: System architecture of access point
III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM Our DCS algorithm is designed as a continuous cycle of three primary actions: Spectrum Scan, Channel Selection, and Channel Switch Decision. Passive scanning of the spectrum is done by WiFi Radio-2 as discussed in section II. Beacon packets of neighboring APs in the 2.4GHz band only need to be considered. Received Signal Strength Indication (RSSI) value, which signiﬁes the power level, is determined for each of these packets. The cumulation of these power levels in a particular channel i, gives a clear picture of that channel’s

interference and noise levels. This information is utilized to select the optimum channel iopt. At the start of each cycle, the current conﬁgured channel number of the AP, icurr, is retrieved. The channel switch decision is made by comparing the difference in power of iopt and icurr along with other factors to maintain stability and consistent throughput. The following parameters are given as input to start this algorithm:
• Scan Time: TSc is the time interval for Spectrum Scan. • Sleep Time: Ts is the time interval between two cycles. • Stability Factor: α is the percentage change in channel
power of icurr and iopt.
The algorithm has following steps:
1) Extract the initial conﬁguration of AP and Virtual APs(VAPs) if any(SSIDs, mode, channel bandwidth).
2) Start timer TSc. 3) Initialize channel power array with zeros Pi = 0, where
channel number i = {1,2,...11}. 4) Read the RSSI value for each AP present in i except
our own AP and VAPs, if any. Convert it from dBm to mW and add it to Pi to get the aggregate channel power of i. 5) Repeat step 3 till timer TSc expires. 6) Calculate the weighted channel power Pwi as per the mathematical channel power model, given in subsection B. 7) If Pwicurr = 0, then retain AP operation on icurr. Go to step 12. 8) Find the channel with minimum power level or interference-free channel(if available). 9) Select the optimal channel number iopt on the basis of Channel Selection, given in subsection B. 10) Extract icurr. 11) Find output of Channel Switch Decision, given in subsection C. If afﬁrmative, switch the channel to iopt, retaining the conﬁguration obtained in step 1. 12) Sleep for Ts and repeat from step 2.
A. Spectrum Scan
In infrastructure WLAN, beacon frames are periodically broadcasted in the network. When WiFi Radio-2 receives a beacon frame, its wireless driver determines the RSSI and provides this information to the application layer via netlink. These values are processed by our algorithm to update Pi. Beacon frames of our AP and VAPs are discarded to ensure correctness of interference level with respect to our AP. TSc depends on the speed of the host processor and environment. TSc has to be chosen such that the beacons of APs present in channel 1 to 11 should be captured only once, and the number of channel switches should be reasonable. Ts should be decided as per the desirable frequency of spectrum scan.
B. Channel Selection
The Channel Selection principle is the unique and innovative solution to the optimization problem of determining the best channel in any dynamic environment. The cumulative

806

channel power Pi captured on each channel i per cycle of scanning time, TSc by the monitoring station is dependent on the interference in the environment. Thus a weighted sum function on Pi is implemented to compute the effect of cochannel interference and overlapping channel interference. One of the following weight function models can be used to generate the weighted channel power Pwi.
1) Weight Function 1:

1

Pwi =

(δj × Pi+j )

(1)

j=−1

where δj is the interference factor and is deﬁned as:

δj =

0.5, 1,

| j |= 1 j=0

(2)

2) Weight Function 2:

2

Pwi =

(δj × Pi+j )

(3)

j=−2

where

δj

is

the

interference 

factor

and

is

deﬁned

as:

 0.25, | j |= 2

δj

=



0.5, 1,

| j |= 1 j=0

(4)

Both the models consider co-channel interference by a factor of one and adjacent channel interference by a factor of half. The primary difference between them is the number of adjacent channels deemed to cause interference. While the ﬁrst model accounts for interference only in the immediately adjacent channels, the second model considers interference of two channels on either side of the center frequency. In the ﬁrst model, the variation in channel power is less whereas the second model is highly sensitive to change in the environment which may cause toggling of iopt. The former has better performance in a crowded environment, but the latter is preferred in a sparsely populated environment. The weighting model can be chosen depending on the deployment scenario. In our work, we have considered the ﬁrst design of weighted sum function.

Pwi of every channel i is compared to detect free channels. A free channel is the channel where interfering APs do not exist or may be present at a distance such that they cause negligible deterioration of our AP’s performance. It is mathematically deﬁned as

Pwi ≤ 0.00001mW

(5)

A set of such adjacent free channels is called a span of continuous free channels. Optimal channel selection is based on the following algorithm.
1) Find the span with the maximum number of free channels.
2) If free channels are available then select iopt as follows: a) If edge channels (1 or 11) are included in the span, then this edge channel is selected. This implicitly gives priority to the orthogonal channels.

Fig. 3: Edge free channel b) If the number of free channels is more than two,
then the middle channel in the span is selected.
Fig. 4: Middle orthogonal free channel
Fig. 5: Middle free channel c) If there is only a single free channel, then this
channel is selected.
Fig. 6: Single free channel 3) If no free channels are available, then the channel with
minimum power is selected. The above ﬁgures are captured using WiFi Analyzer v3.11.2 Android application in real-life scenarios. “CDOT-DFS-CRB” is our AP which is operational in the optimal channel iopt. C. Channel Switch Decision
The Channel Switch Decision is the proposed solution for the decision problem of whether our AP should be switched

807

iii) Even if Pwiopt = 0, but ∆P < α and icurr ∈ {1,6,11} then decide not to switch channel. Or-
thogonal channel is given priority in this condition. iv) If ∆P < α and Pwiopt = 0, then decide not to
switch channel.

Fig. 7: No free channel

to iopt, the output of the previous section. It is essentially based on the user-desired stability factor α, which implies the tolerance of interference by the AP. The value of α is inversely proportional to the number of channel switches. A lower value makes the AP switch to iopt more often. In reallife deployment, due to this continuous toggling of the AP, total packets dropped while switching increases drastically. On the contrary, a higher value will ﬁx our AP on a channel which may suffer from co-channel interference. It will also reduce the AP’s sensitivity to the dynamic environment. Thus, α should be optimized with respect to the tolerance of AP for the best performance of this algorithm. DCS algorithm takes this α value as input in the beginning and decides to switch as follows:
1) Compute cumulative channel power difference ∆P .

∆P = Pwicurr − Pwiopt × 100

(6)

Pwicurr

2) Decide channel switching as per the truth value of following compound statement:“Change in channel power is greater than α, or the current channel is not orthogonal and free channels are available”

This decision statement is deﬁned in propositional logic

as

S : P ∨ (¬Q ∧ R)

(7)

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
Our AP uses Atheros-based WLM200N2-26 IEEE 802.11 b/g/n radio as WiFi Radio-1 and WiFi Radio-2 with open source Ath9k driver. Freescale QorIQ T1024 processor is used as processing platform with Ethernet backhaul of 1Gbps as shown in Fig. 2. hostapd and hostapd cli v2.5 are used for enabling AP and channel switching operation respectively. DCS algorithm is embedded in the open source application, horst v4.2 which is initially designed for band snifﬁng only.
Test Setup: Our AP is conﬁgured in IEEE802.11n mode with Tx power of 20dBm and 20MHz bandwidth on icurr as shown in Table II. A controlled environment is created inside a Radio Frequency(RF) enclosure for conducting throughput test for our AP in cases 1, 2 and 3. AP-Client data transfer of 20Mb is also generated on the interfering APs to replicate the effect of real-time data load. Test cases 4, 5 and 6 are conducted in an instance of the dynamic wireless environment of laboratory(20x20m) with around 10 interfering APs as illustrated in Fig. 7. Random real-time data transfer is present in these interfering APs. The six test scenarios are described below:

TABLE II: Test scenarios

Case No.

Environment

icurr

1

-

X

2

Fig.3

1

3

Fig.4

11

4

Fig.5

6

5

Fig.6

6

6

Fig.7

1

iopt
icurr 11 6 4 9 X

Interference Type None
Overlapping Co-channel Co-channel
Both Both

Complexity O(1)
O(11)

where the propositions are P : Change in channel power is greater than α Q : Current channel is orthogonal R : Free channels are available
TABLE I: Truth table for decision statement
P ¬Q R S i) T X X T ii) F T T T iii) F F T F iv) F X F F
i) If ∆P > α, then decide to switch channel irrespective of other conditions.
ii) Even if ∆P < α, but icurr ∈/ {1,6,11} and Pwiopt = 0, then decide to switch channel. Free or clean channel is given priority in this condition.

Best Scenario Case 1: No interfering APs are present in icurr
Average Scenario Case 2: Interfering APs present in channels 2 & 6 Case 3: Interfering APs present in channels 1 & 11 Case 4: Interfering APs present in all orthogonal channels 1, 6 & 11
Worst Scenario Case 5: Interfering APs present in all the channels except channel 9 Case 6: Interfering APs present in all the channels
Throughput improvement is observed in all the above cases. The effective implementation of the DCS algorithm depends on two input parameters: Scan Time, TSc and Stability Factor, α. The optimal value of these conditional parameters are derived in the following section, and the increment in throughput is also depicted.

808

A. Scan Time
Scan Time is the input parameter that depends on the host processor and environment. As discussed in section III, TSc is selected such that the WiFi Radio-2 can capture the beacons across the spectrum accurately. It is evaluated by rigorously testing the behavior of the DCS algorithm on increasing the scan time and observing the number of channel switches caused thereof. This experiment is conducted for our AP over a period of 24 hours in an uncontrolled environment of Case 6. TSc is varied from 1 to 15 seconds. DCS is initiated with α value ﬁxed at 10% to ensure sensitivity to the unpredictable environment. Ts is taken as thrice the value of TSc.

Fig. 9: Mean channel switches for varying α

throughput testing for our AP proceeded with α value ﬁxed to 20%.

Fig. 8: Mean channel switches for varying TSc
In Fig. 8, the mean channel switches are calculated for 10 iterations of a particular scan time TSc. When TSc ranges from 1 to 5s, it is observed that our AP switches to iopt very frequently. TSc of up to 5 seconds is not enough to capture all the beacons due to which some part of the spectrum is falsely identiﬁed to be unoccupied. Our DCS gives priority to these free channels and switches accordingly. For TSc >10s, beacons of the same AP may be captured more than once which may make ∆P > α and thus cause an erroneous channel switch. Our AP exhibits a reasonable number of channel switches with TSc value from 6 to 10s. Thus, TSc of 8 seconds and Ts of 24 seconds is considered for further testing.

C. Data Throughput
A comparative study of the performance of our AP with and without the DCS algorithm implementation shows better throughput in the former case. Ideal throughput for IEEE 802.11n mode of operation for our AP is ≈100Mbps over the association rate of 130Mbps. Mean throughput is taken from 10 iterations of 100Mb data transfer between our AP and Client for 5 minutes. Comprehensive testing in all the six test cases listed above has been carried out, and the result has been plotted as shown in Fig. 10.

B. Stability Factor
The value of α is the stability factor of our system which deﬁnes the sensitivity towards interference in the environment as discussed in section III. In general, it can be chosen from the range of 20 to 35% as shown in the ﬁgure below.
α for our AP is chosen to be 20%, by observing the mean channel switches of 100 runs over α varying from 5 to 50%. Cases 4 & 6 are considered as they represent real-time network deployments. The optimum value of α is ﬁnalized to be 20% since there is the same number of mean channel switches for both the cases as shown in Fig. 9. For α <20%, more than one channel switch occurs which can incur higher overhead and less throughput improvement. With α value above 20%, channel switching reduces further, thus making the system insensitive to changes in the dynamic environment. As a result,

Fig. 10: Data throughput in different test cases
The best environment for deploying an AP is having no kind of interference in its operating channel. In Case 1 which complies with this scenario, it is evident that data throughput results for AP running with or without DCS are comparable. Here the throughput is 98.15Mbps since there is no channel switch. Other cases which undergo channel switch achieve slightly lesser throughput than the ideal value due to the overhead associated with channel switching. Case 2 addresses the impact of overlapping channel interference only. As shown in Fig. 3, if there are neighboring APs in channels 2 & 6, our AP which is initially operating in channel 1 experiences

809

overlapping channel interference. In this case, DCS algorithm shifts it to channel 11 due to which throughput increases by nearly 31%. In the third case, co-channel interference is caused by interfering AP present in channel 11 where our AP is currently residing. By switching our AP operation to channel 6, throughput immensely improves by 35.6%. Case 4 also shows a similar co-channel interference scenario although the improvement in throughput is lesser(≈25%) than the previous case. This is expected since iopt still suffers from overlapping channel interference as shown in Fig 5. The worst case scenarios are depicted in the last two cases where the environment is overcrowded. There is no interference-free channel across the whole spectrum in Case 6. Although in Case 5, iopt has no interference at its center frequency, there is considerable interference in the side sub-carriers. Hence the throughput improvement is negligible.
Fig. 11 shows a statistical comparison of the throughput obtained in various operational channels in the real-time environment shown in Fig. 5. Several interfering APs are present in channel 1, 6 and 11. “CDOTGN0” and “CDOTGN2” are two APs introduced to create active sessions of 20Mb data transfer in channel 1 and 11 respectively. “CDOTGN1” has one active session of 10Mb in channel 6. Under this condition, DCS switches our AP, “CDOT-DFS-CRB” to iopt i.e. channel 4. To study the performance of our AP in some other channel instead of iopt, we conﬁgured our AP in each of the 11 channels in this environment. Throughput is measured by transferring data of 100Mb for 5 minutes between our AP and Client.
Fig. 11: Throughput comparison between iopt and other channels in Case 4
It is seen that maximum throughput is achieved in iopt. Due to the higher load and co-channel interference in channels 1 and 11, the throughput is remarkably low. Channel 6 suffers from a slightly lesser load which improves the throughput. Overlapping channel interference in the channels 2, 5, 7 and 10 hampers the performance also. Better throughput(>70Mbps) can be expected in the clear channels 3, 4, 8 and 9 which can be seen in Fig. 11. This result veriﬁes that the optimal channel selected by our DCS algorithm is indeed the best channel under the given circumstances.

V. CONCLUSION
In our proposed algorithm, co-channel and overlapping channel interference detection is achieved by a co-located monitoring WiFi radio which passively scans the spectrum over a period. To avoid interference, two mathematical models have been designed to compute the cumulative channel power of the spectrum. Channel selection is an optimization problem since the deployment environment can be highly turbulent and unpredictable. The channel selected by our DCS mechanism is proven to be the best in six such real-time test cases. Channel switching is a decision problem and is solved by considering the stability factor and giving priority to the orthogonal channels as well as free channels. Considerable improvement of throughput is observed on using DCS algorithm in our AP. This algorithm is easily implementable and can be used on any generic processor platform. It works with existing IEEE 802.11 MAC and does not require any modiﬁcation. It can cope with the interference caused by any neighboring IEEE 802.11 compliant AP and selects the optimal channel for better throughput. We have practically implemented this algorithm on our AP deployed in several real-time IEEE 802.11n networks.
Channel congestion or load is another parameter to estimate the efﬁciency of a channel for throughput improvement. Our future work will consider this parameter along with received signal strength for optimal channel selection in IEEE 802.11 WLANs.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Li and X. Wang and S.A. Mujtaba, “Co-channel Interference Avoidance Algorithm in 802.11 Wireless LANs”, Vol. 4, IEEE 58th Vehicular Technology Conference, VTC 2003-Fall, October 6-9, 2003, Orlando, FL, USA.
[2] E.G. Villegas, E. Lo´pez-Aguilera, R. Vidal and J. Paradells, “Effect of adjacent-channel interfernece in IEEE802.11 WLANs”, 2nd International Conference on Cognitive Radio Oriented Wireless Networks and Communications, CrownCom 2007, August 1-3, 2007, Orlando, FL, USA.
[3] M.W. Rocha da Silva and J. Ferreira de Rezende, “A Dynamic Channel Allocation Mechanism for IEEE 802.11 Networks”, VI International Telecommunications Symposium, ITS 2006, September 3-6, 2006, Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil. .
[4] R. Akl and A. Arepally, “Dynamic Channel Assignment in IEEE 802.11 Networks”, IEEE International Conference on Portable Information Devices, PORTABLE07, May 25-29, 2007, Orlando, FL, USA.
[5] B.P. Tewari and S.C. Ghosh, “Interference Avoidance through Frequency Assignment and Association Control in IEEE 802.11 WLAN”, IEEE 13th International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications, August 21-23, 2014, Cambridge, MA, USA.
[6] P.K. Tiwary, N. Maskey, S. Khakurel and G. SacShdeva, “Effects of Cochannel Interference in WLAN and Cognitive Radio Based Approach to Minimize it”, International Conference on Advances in Recent Technologies in Communication and Computing, ArtCom2010, October 16-17, 2010, Kottayam, India.
[7] “IEEE Standard for Information technology Telecommunications and information exchange between systems Local and metropolitan area networks Speciﬁc requirements, Part-11:Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations.”, IEEE Std 802.11-2016.

810

