AFFIRMED NETWORKS Scale it. Flex it. Launch it.

Affirmed Networks™

Affirmed Networks' Mobile Content Cloud (MCC) offers mobile network operators the agility and flexibility necessary to keep up with traffic demand—and the chance to reduce overall total cost of ownership by as much as 67 percent.

The Mobile Content Cloud represents the next generation of mobile networks: extremely scalable, remarkably flexible, and completely virtual. The Mobile Content Cloud offers advanced network functions virtualization (NFV) and software-defined networking (SDN) capabilities to deliver a common, composable, and highly-scalable mobile core with the following:

• vEPC: complete, consolidated solution runs on a single, virtual network function (VNF) instance for better performance, scalability, cost effectiveness. 3GPP-compliant functions: MME/SGSN, SGW, GGSN/PGW, ePDG, TWAG, CSGN (NB-IoT), SCEF (IoT), PCRF, AAA, HSS.

• IoT Solutions Suite: comprehensive support for 2G/3G, LTE, LTE-M, NB-IoT services for high mobility/bandwidth to low-mobility/bandwidth applications.

•

DPI and Value-Added Services: integrated packet inspection, media, content services: web/video optimization, content filtering, security (e.g. subscriber firewall, NAT).

•

WorkflowService Chaining: subscriber classification and functions chaining allow construction of services in minutes instead of months as is typical in legacy silo architectures.

• eAlfefmirmenetds SaenrdvinceetwAuotrok-mwaidtieonsePrlvaitcfeorimnst(aAnScAesP;)a: uctoonmfigautersatsioenrvmiceancargeaetmioenn,tparcorvoissisonminuglt,i-ivnestnadnotriavtiiortnual/physical network of network functions; supports standard network element interfaces: SOAP, REST, NETCONF/YANG, and CLI.

• Virtualized WiFi Gateway: Trusted WLAN Access Point/Gateway (TWAP/TWAG) and evolved Packet Data Gateway (ePDG) functions extend network reach and deliver services, such as WiFi calling, through secure access to trusted and untrusted networks.

•

Intelligent vProbe and Analytics: co-located with the VNFs to reduce hardware costs, network complexity, and the performance issues typically associated with legacy probe solutions, while providing real-time network analytics.

•

VNF Manager: create, provision, instantiate virtual functions in place of traditional network appliances. VNFs can be created per service and data is routed via an optimized processing path across the network using network slicing, offers

security, efficient transport, optimized core network processing, and appropriate service quality.

• Affirmed Virtual Slice Selection Function(vSSF): enables fine-grained network slicing across legacy, virtualized and multi-vendor network environments. The vSSF also supports fine-grained selection of network resources for 5G networks delivering a "5G Ready" solution now.

Network Slicing

Packet Core

MME/ SGSN

PGW/ SGW/ GGSN

Afﬁrmed Service Orchestration & Function Chaining

Media & Content

Policy & Charging

Security

Analytics

DPI Heuristics

TCP
Optimization

HTTP Proxy

PCEF Subscriber & Partner Policy Enforcement

HSS/ HLR

Firewall

NAT

Routing

Subscriber & Service Analytics

Virtual Probe

3rd Party
Service Chaining

WiFi ePDG/ TWAG

IoT/ NBIoT

Web/Video Caching

Content Filtering

Video Adaptation
& MOS

Policy Manager
PCRF

Policy Manager ANDSF

Web DBs Phishing Malware
IWF

Secure Tunneling

FRAUD Detection & Mgmt

RAN Service Analytics Engine*

Mediation Service Function

Hypervisor (KVM, VMware)

Hardware - COTS x86 Server

Analytics

www.affirmednetworks.com

Open and Interoperable Virtualization Solutions for the New Wireless Era
The Affirmed Mobile Content Cloud is a flexible, scalable, carrier-class virtualized solution that includes multiple, industry-leading innovations that can bring new, differentiated services to market by reducing the cost of creating and launching those services, while improving customer quality of experience with right-sized capacity in the network. Mobile Content Cloud reflects years of virtualization experience. Here are just a few of the benefits from using the Mobile Content Cloud:
• Elasticity, including independent scaling of session, I/O, and signaling dimensions. Scaling along different dimensions enables operators to avoid over-investing in capacity.
• Performance scales linearly with Intel® processor increases in core count and/or clock rate increases. • Cost savings by eliminating the need for manual operations, lowering energy costs, simplifying
vendor interactions, and reducing the need for traditional capacity planning functions while enabling faster turn-up of services and utilizing less resources. • Business agility through Service Orchestration to bind many instances of mobile broadband functions together to create a new service, enabling mobile operators to design, test (with real-time traffic), and deploy many new services in a matter of hours. • Flexible deployment model that supports single or multiple packet core and Gi-LAN elements, providing mobile operators with greater flexibility in terms of deploying and scaling individual or combined network elements.
Real-World Results for Mobile Content Cloud
Several production deployments of Affirmed Networks' Mobile Content Cloud illustrate the overall value and versatility of this solution in a wide variety of industry segments.
• Internet of Things (IoT). Vodafone deploys the Affirmed Mobile Content Cloud to deliver M2M communications and Connected Car services over the operator's global network infrastructure. Deployment of Affirmed's vEPC across multiple markets provides unprecedented scalability and service creation agility.
• 5G Ready Mobile Network: Etisalat's nationwide deployment of Affirmed's virtualized network infrastructure allows the operator to deliver connectivity and compelling new services to their consumer, including: Machine-to-Machine (M2M), IoT, VoLTE, WiFi Calling, and Smart City initiatives.
• Mobile Virtual Network Operator (MVNO). DIGITALK, a cloud-based Mobile Virtual Network Enabler (MVNE)-as-a-Service-provider, leverages the Affirmed Mobile Content Cloud to deliver data, VoLTE and Voice over WiFi (VoWiFi) services to global service providers, such as KPN, British Telecom, and Vodafone.
About Affirmed Networks Affirmed Networks was founded with a vision to develop mobile network solutions that completely revolutionize mobile networks and mobile subscriber and content management functions. Affirmed Networks helps mobile network operators say “yes” to the future with virtualized network solutions that reduce complexity and cost, scale efficiently, and accelerate time-to-market to increase their competitive advantage. Affirmed Networks delivers a subscriber management and service solutions that bundle gateway functionality with rich application and content delivery services into an industry-leading, virtualized solution. In 2015, Forbes named Affirmed Networks in the “Next Billion Dollar” startup list, and the firm was recently lauded as a “Game-Changer” – the highest rating given – in the category of “SDN/NFV Specialist” by Current Analysis.
Contact Us
New Business / Angela Whiteford / (+1) 978 268 0848 / info@affirmednetworks.com

