Analyzing LoRa long-range, low-power, wide-area networks
using stochastic geometry
Bart lomiej B laszczyszyn

Paul Mühlethaler

Inria/ENS
Rue Simone Iff
Paris 75589
Bartek.Blaszczyszyn@ens.fr

Inria
Rue Simone Iff
Paris 75589
Paul.Muhlethaler@inria.fr

arXiv:1811.01886v1 [cs.NI] 5 Nov 2018

ABSTRACT
In this paper we present a simple, stochastic-geometric model of a
wireless access network exploiting the LoRA (Long Range) protocol, which is a non-expensive technology allowing for long-range,
single-hop connectivity for the Internet of Things. We assume a
space-time Poisson model of packets transmitted by LoRA nodes
to a fixed base station. Following previous studies of the impact of
interference [8, 10], we assume that a given packet is successfully
received when no interfering packet arrives with similar power
before the given packet payload phase. This is as a consequence of
LoRa using different transmission rates for different link budgets
(transmissions with smaller received powers use larger spreading
factors) and LoRa intra-technology interference treatment. Using
our model, we study the scaling of the packet reception probabilities per link budget as a function of the spatial density of nodes and
their rate of transmissions. We consider both the parameter values
recommended by the LoRa provider, as well as proposing LoRa
tuning to improve the equality of performance for all link budgets.
We also consider spatially non-homogeneous distributions of LoRa
nodes. We show also how a fair comparison to non-slotted Aloha
can be made within the same framework.

KEYWORDS
Internet of Things; Low-Power, Wide-Area Network; LoRa; stochastic geometry; Poisson process; propagation process; reception
probability

1

INTRODUCTION

Low-power, wide-area networks (LPWANs) will undoubtedly play
a crucial role in the development of the Internet of Things. They are
wireless cellular networks that, in contrast to LTE (and also WiFi
and Bluetooth), do not focus on high data rate communications. The
goal of LPWANs is to ensure large coverage areas with reasonable
data rates and low energy consumption. A good scaling in terms of
the density of nodes is also a key requirement for these systems.
Several systems in the field of LPWANs exist. Essentially, four
options are available to customers: Sigfox, operator standards LTEM or NB-IoT, and several proprietary solutions, LoRa (Long Range)
being one of them. Sigfox is offered as an operator service and the
technology is proprietary. It operates in the 968/902 MHz licencefree industrial scientific and medical (ISM) radio band. Sigfox acts
as both the technology and the service provider and has quickly deployed a large number of base stations in Europe and beyond. Long
Term Evolution Machine-to-Machine LTE-M and Narrow Band-IoT
are the standards promoted by the traditional telecom operators

that expect to propose solutions for machine-to-machine traffic
through standardized solutions, in particular in the framework of
the forthcoming 5G systems. There is a significant number of proprietary solutions such as Accelus, Cyan’s Cynet, Ingenu/On-Ramp,
SilverSpring Starfish, etc., but only a limited amount of information
about these systems is available.
LoRa is also a proprietary technology developed by Cycleo of
Grenoble, France, and acquired by Semtech in 2012. As its name
suggests, it mainly aims at long range transmissions with a high
robustness, multipath and Doppler resistance, and low power. LoRa
networks often operate in the unlicensed ISM band (434 MHz and
868 MHz in Europe and 433 MHz and 915 MHz in the USA), but
can also use licensed bands in the spectrum ranging from 137 to
1020 MHz. LoRa uses a kind of Chirp Spread Spectrum (CSS) with
Forward Error Correction (FEC), where wideband linear frequency
modulated chirp pulses are used to encode information and the
spreading factor is directly linked to the power decay between the
end device and the base station.
We decided to focus our study on LoRa systems because, even
though it is a proprietary technology, a significant amount of information is available on it, see Section 3, making it possible to model
and study LoRa networks. Moreover, LoRa industrial momentum
seems to be significant and commercial success for LoRa is likely.
LoRa technology has already been studied, both for the evaluation of pairs of simultaneous transmissions [10] and for the scaling
evaluation of a large network [11], [8]. However, to the authors’
best knowledge, there is no commonly accepted analytical model
of LoRa networks. A major difficulty in addressing performances
of LoRa consists in its multiparameter nature, with a crucial rule
played by the spreading factors and, closely related to them, packet
transmission time. An additional difficulty is the complexity of the
signal-to-interference analysis of packet reception in CSS technology.
In this paper we propose a mathematical model allowing one to
calculate packet reception probabilities per link budget, according
to the spatial density of nodes and their rate of transmissions, as
well as all main LoRa parameters. It is based on a Poisson rain
(space-time) model of packet transmissions from the nodes to the
base station (gateway). This model has already been used in [5, 6]
to study non-slotted Aloha system.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we present some related studies, which are crucial to our
approach. In Section 3 we present LoRa system assumptions and in
Section 4 we present our model with its analysis. Section 5 presents
numerical results. In Section 6 we briefly sketch how LoRa can

of the received power, called sensitivity, for transmissions with
125 kHz bandwidth.

be compared to non-slotted Aloha using a Poisson rain model of
packet transmissions. Finally, Section 7 concludes the article.

2

RELATED STUDIES

SF

A few papers, such as [12], present measurements of existing LoRa
systems and study the actual performances of the end devices with
respect to their relative distance to the gateways. They aim at
optimising the parametrization of LoRa networks. However, due
to the limited number of end devices considered in these studies,
it is difficult to gauge the scaling properties of LoRa networks, for
instance in terms of the maximum number of end devices supported
with a given goodput rate. Moreover, these studies do not permit a
fine-tuned analysis of collisions in LoRa networks.
In contrast, [10] scrutinizes interference in LoRa in order to
establish packet collision rules, which are reproduced next in a
simulation model allowing the authors to study the scalability issues
of LoRa networks. A real platform to test capture in LoRa networks
is used in [8]. The conclusions drawn from the tests lead to a
collision model close to that derived in [10] and to similar scalability
evaluation results. We recall the collision rules established in [10]
and [8] in Section 3.2 since we integrate them in our stochasticgeometric LoRa network model.

3

6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Table 1: Sensitivity (minimum received power thresholds)
and corresponding spreading factors

For example, when the signal is received with at least −121 dBm
of power then the spreading factor is set to its minimal value SF = 6.
When the received power is in the interval [−124, −121) then SF = 7,
etc. The smallest acceptable received power −137 dBm triggers
SF = 12.

LORA SYSTEM DESCRIPTION AND
ASSUMPTIONS

3.2

Collision model

A precise (signal to interference) analysis of the reception of packets
in LoRa chirp spread spectrum systems is complicated. We will
use a simplified collision model, to this end, inspired by the results
presented in [8] and [10]. The first assumption we make is that two
transmissions using different values of SF do not interfere with each
other; this assumption is retained in the collision model described
in [8]. In other words, the codes with different spreading factors
are assumed orthogonal.
The second assumption concerns collisions caused by simultaneous transmissions using the same value of SF. Different cases of this,
identified in [10], depend on the time overlap of the (two or more)
simultaneous transmissions and their received powers, called also
Received Signal Strength Indications (RSSIs). More specifically, [10]
distinguishes five cases of possible overlap of the transmission period of a given packet with an interfering transmission, presented
in Figure 1, combined with two cases regarding the difference between their RSSI values. It shows that the given packet is always
successfully received if its RSSI is significantly greater than that of
the interfering packet or, in the case of similar RSSI values, when
the interfering transmission starts relatively late, precisely during
the payload part of the given packet (case 5 in Figure 1). It is not
successful when an interfering packet with a similar RSSI starts
before the payload part of the given packet (depicted as cases 1 to
4 in Figure 1).
An additional advantage of relating the spreading factors to
the received powers, as described in Section 3.1, is that any two
transmissions with significantly different received powers will use
different spreading factors and thus, according to the assumption
made above, will not interfere. Consequently, we can assume that
a given packet is successfully received when no interfering packet
arrives with similar power before its payload phase.

LoRa systems are highly parameterizable. The carrier frequency
can be chosen from 137 to 1020 MHz by steps of 61 kHz and the
bandwidth (the width of frequencies in the radio band) can be set to
125 MHz, 250 MHz or 500 MHz. LoRa can use transmission powers
from -4 dBm to 20 dBm.
A key parameter of LoRa is the spreading factor, which is the
ratio between the symbol rate and the chip rate. Denoted in what
follows by SF, and expressed at the logarithmic scale at base 2 (thus
the increase by 1 of the SF multiplies the chip per symbol rate by
2), the SF of LoRa varies from 6 to 12. With SF = 6 the symbol rate
is the highest but the transmission is the least robust. The value of
SF is fixed for individual transmissions depending on the received
power, as explained in Section 3.1.
The physical layer of LoRa also incorporates Forward Error Correction (FEC) that permits the recovery of bits of information in
the case of corruption by interference. This requires a small overhead of additional encoding of the data in the transmitted packet
thus reducing the Coding Rate (CR). The available values of CR are
4/5, 5/6, 4/7, 4/8 (with smaller values providing more reliability).

3.1

Sensitivity in dBm
(for 125 kHz bandwidth system)
-121
-124
-127
-130
-133
-135
-137

Spreading factor and received power

The spreading factor parameter SF, which is the logarithm at base 2
of the ratio between the symbol and the chip rate, is a key parameter
of LoRa. Even if in principle it can be set arbitrarily, it is obvious
that its value must be appropriately chosen in order to optimize
the performance of the network. A reasonable choice is to make
it inversely related to the received power: higher received power
allows one to use a smaller spreading factor and thus reduce the
packet transmission time, as specified in Section 3.3. As an example,
Table 1 gives the values of SF proposed in [2] for different thresholds
2

4
Interfering packet
First Symbols
(Preamble)

2nd case

1st case
Optional
symbols

Optional
Header

Payload

4.1

Interfering packet

4th case

Interfering packet

5th case

Interfering packet
Time

Figure 1: Collision model: different cases of a given packet
transmission (in blue) overlapping with an interfering transmission. The reception of the given packet is successful if
its received power (RSSI) is significantly greater than that of
the interfering packet or, in the case of similar RSSI values,
when the interfering transmission starts during the payload
(case 5). Cases 1–4 with similar RSSI values give collisions.

3.3

Packet transmission times

The packet transmission (on air) time depends on its composition
(cf Figure 1) and the symbol transmission time Tsymbol , which is
related to the spreading factor SF and the bandwidth BW via a
fundamental relation
Tsymbol =

2SF

.

Prec (X i ) :=

Ptr Fi
Ptr Fi
=
l(|X i |) (κ |X i |)β

where, given {X i }, Fi are i.i.d. with common distribution of F and
| · | is the Euclidean distance on the plane.
Following the system description presented in Section 3.1, we
assume that the spreading factors SF used for transmissions of
different packets are related to their received powers. More specifically, we consider a set of threshold powers (sensitivities) P1 <
P2 < · · · < P N , for some N ≥ 1, with the corresponding spreading factors SFn , n = 1, . . . , n, and we assume that the value SFn
is used for the transmission from X i when Prec (X i ) ∈ [Pn , Pn+1 ),
with P N +1 := ∞. No successful reception (packet loss) is assumed
when Prec (X i ) < P1 .
We have seen in Ssection 3.3 that packet transmission times
depend on many parameters, in particular the spreading factor
SF. Consequently, we denote by Bn the transmission time of a
packet using spreading factor value SFn and by ∆n the transmission
time of the initial part, required for the base station to lock on
the transmission. During this latter part, an interfering packet of
similar power can lead to a collision, as explained in Section 3.2.
More precisely, we assume that a given packet transmitted from X i
and reaching the base station with power Prec (X i ) ∈ [Pn , Pn+1 ) is
successfully received if no any other packet is on air with received
power in [Pn , Pn+1 ) during the initial time ∆n of the given packet’s
transmission.

(1)

BW

The following specific expressions for transmission times (in seconds) of the two main parts of the packet are given in [1].
Preamble time (with with the optional symbols):
(4.25 + np)Tsymbol .
Payload time (with the optional header):

l 8PL − 4SF + 28 + 16 − 20H m

8 + max
(CR + 4), 0 Tsymbol ,
4(SF − 2DE)
with notation explained in Table 2.

BW
SF
np
PL
H
DE
CR

Poisson LoRa model with collisions

Our LoRA network model consists of one base station located (without loss of generality) at the origin of the plane R2 and a space-time
Poisson process of packets sent to it. This model, called Poisson
rain in [5, 6], assumes packet transmissions initiated from points
{X i } on the plane at time instants {Ti }, with Φ = {(X i ,Ti )} being a
Poisson point process on R2 ×R. Our default assumption is that that
Φ is homogeneous in space and time, with the expected number
of transmissions initiated per unit of time and space denoted by
λ. However, in Section 4.2.2 we shall also consider some spacenon-homogeneous, radially symmetric Poisson model of packet
transmissions.
We assume that the packets are transmitted with power P tr and
suffer from path-loss modeled by the usual power-law function
l(r ) = (κr )β , of the transmission distance r with some constants
κ > 0 and β > 2, as well as independent propagation effects (such
as those from multi-path fading, shadowing or other seemingly
random phenomena perturbing the base-station-to-device signal)
modeled by a generi random variable F . Thus, a packet transmitted
from a location X i (regardless of time) is received at the base station
with power equal to

Interfering packet

3rd case

NETWORK MODEL AND ANALYSIS

In this section we propose a stochastic geometric model of LoRa
and present some results of its analysis.

bandwidth in Hz
Spreading Factor
number of additional preamble symbols
payload in Bytes
H=0 if header, 1 if no header present
DE=1 if low data rate optimization, 0 if not
Coding Rate
Table 2: LoRa main parameters

4.2

Performance analysis

We begin by recalling a useful result regarding the process of received powers in an homogeneous Poisson network model with
3

and

power-low path-loss model; see e.g [3, Lemma 4.2.2]. In the context
of our Poisson rain network model it can be formulated as follows.
Lemma 4.1. The values of powers received at the origin from all
packet transmissions initiated in the Poisson rain model Φ during any
time interval of length T form an non-homogeneous Poisson point
process on (0, ∞) with intensity measure

for n = 1, . . . , N − 1. Then the reception probabilities are constant
Πn = Π.
Proof. The result follows directly from Proposition 4.2 by substituting the values of Pn in the expressions for Πn , for n = 1, . . . , N .


2aT −2/β −1
t
dt,
β
where

Obviously, the larger target value Π, the larger all power thresholds Pn , in particular P1 , meaning that more transmissions will
remain unsuccessful because having a received power smaller than
the minimal acceptable value P 1 .

πλPtr E[F 2/β ]
2/β

a=

,
κ2
F is the generic random propagation in the wireless channel, and λ is
the expected number of transmissions initiated per unit of time and
space.

4.2.3 A non-homogeneous spatial density of transmission. We
consider now a non-homogeneous pattern of transmissions. More
specifically, let the process of transmissions form a space-time Poisson point process with the local density of transmission initiated at
distance r from the origin being equal to λr α , for some parameter
α. A natural assumption is α < 0, meaning that the density decays
within the distance, but α > 0 is also possible. Obviously α = 0 is
the previously considered homogeneous case.
In order to study this case we need the following extension of
Lemma 4.1.

4.2.1 Successful reception probabilities. We now consider any
given (arbitrary) packet transmission arriving at the base station
with power within the interval, [Pn , Pn+1 ) for some n = 1, . . . , N .
We denote by Πn the probability that this transmission is successfully received by the base station. As previously stated, the
transmission of this packet takes time Bn , with the initial time ∆n
required for the base station to lock on this transmission. Using
Lemma 4.1 we obtain our first result.

Lemma 4.4. The values of powers received during any time interval
of length T at the origin in the Poisson rain model, with intensity
of transmissions λs r α at distance r from the origin, form an nonhomogeneous Poisson point process on (0, ∞) with intensity measure

Proposition 4.2.
Πn = exp



−2/β
− an (Pn

−2/β
− Pn+1 )

N
 Õ
 −β /2
1
Pn = −
log(Π)
a
i=n i



for n = 1, . . . , N − 1, and


−2/β
Π N = exp − a N P N
,

2a 0T −(α +2)/β −1
t
dt,
β

where
where

an = a(Bn + ∆n ).

πλPtr

E[F (α +2)/β ]

.
κ α +2
Remark 1. Note that the intensity of received powers in our nonhomogeneous model, given in Lemma 4.4, coincides with that of the
homogeneous model presented in Lemma 4.1, with the path-loss exponent β and the intensity of transmissions λ replaced respectively
by
2β
β0 =
α +2
2λ
λ0 =
.
(α + 2)κ α
Consequently, we observe that the performance of the considered nonhomogeneous LoRa network (regarding metrics based on the process
of received powers, as e.g. the reception probabilities Πn ) is equivalent
to the performance the homogeneous LoRa model with the above
parameter modifications. This is yet another instance of the network
equivalence property formulated in [4].

Proof. According to the adopted collision model, Πn is equal
to the probability that there is no transmission in the Poisson rain
model during the interval of time of duration Bn + ∆n , reaching the
base station with the power in the same interval [Pn , Pn+1 ), assuming the convention P N +1 = ∞. By Lemma 4.1 and the well known
formula for Poisson void probabilities (cf e.g., [3, Section 3.4.1])
 −2a ∫ Pn+1

n
t −2/β −1dt .
Πn = exp
β
Pn
Direct evaluation of the above integral completes the proof.

(α +2)/β

a=



Note that the transmission times Bn and ∆n depend on the
spreading factor SFn used for the transmissions with received powers in [Pn , Pn+1 ), as well as on other parameters, as explained in
Section 3.3.
4.2.2 Equalizing the reception probabilities. We assume now that
all LoRa model parameters are given except the power thresholds
P1 , . . . , P N (sensitivities), which we want to fix so that the packets
arriving with all powers not smaller than P1 have the same reception
probability. We have the following result.

Proof of Lemma 4.4. By the displacement theorem for Poisson
processes (see e.g. [3, Theorem 4.4.2]) the process of received powers is a Poisson process. To compute its mean measure denoted by
Λ(t), we calculate the mean number of transmissions started within
a unit interval of time and received with power greater than t > 0

Proposition 4.3. For a given Π ∈ (0, 1) assume

 −β /2
1
PN = −
log(Π)
aN

Λ(t) = E[#{(X i ,Ti ) ∈ Φ : (κ |X i |)−β Ptr Fi > t,Ti ∈ [0, 1]}].
4

Writing the condition on the received power in the form
 P F  1/β
tr i
1/κ
|X i | <
t
and using the spatial density of transmissions, we obtain
h ∫ (Ptr Fi /t )1/β 1/κ
i
Λ(t) = 2πλE
r α rdr

BW
SF
np
PL
H
DE
CR

0

h
i
2πλ
(α +2)/β −(α +2)/β
=
E
F
t
.
(α + 2)κ α +2
Differentiating Λ(t) with respect to t and multiplying by −1 one
concludes the proof.


Table 3: LoRa parameters used in our model

NUMERICAL RESULTS

In this section we present numerical results obtained using the
model and its analysis developed in Section 4, and assuming parameter values typical for a rural LoRa network.
We first consider a homogeneous deployment of nodes parametrized by the mean number N nodes of nodes within a radius of R =
8000m around the base station, which corresponds to the spatial
density λs = Nπnodes
of nodes per per m2 . Suppose that each node
R2
transmits a packet to the base station every 16.666 minutes on
average, which is equivalent to the rate λt = 0.001 transmissions
per second. In order to represent this network we use the Poisson
rain model with space-time intensity λ := λs λt of transmissions
per second per m2 .

Probability of success versus number of nodes
1
0.95
0.9
Probability of success

5

125 kHz
{6, . . . , 12}
6
20 Bytes
H=0 (with header)
DE=0 (no low data rate optimization)
4/5

0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
SF=12
SF=11
SF=10
SF=9
SF=8
SF=7
SF=6

0.65

Remark 2. Note that when use the Poisson rain model we are
making an approximation of the real network. In fact, ”real” nodes
are fixed in space and send (assume independent Poisson) streams
of packets in time. Nodes in Poisson rain model are not fixed in
space: we may see them rather as “born” at some time, transmitting a
packet and “dying” immediately after. While it is possible to come up
with a model representing fixed nodes in space, see e.g. the Poissonrenewal model developed in [5, 6] for non-slotted Aloha, its analysis
is more complicated, with less closed-form results. Moreover, most
importantly, the two models provide very close results. This can be
theoretically explained by the convergence of the space-time pattern
of transmissions in the real situation (with fixed nodes) to the Poisson
rain model when λs → ∞ and λt → 0 with λ = λs λt = constant.
Numerical results provided in [5, 6] confirm this statement.

Figure 2: Probability of successful reception versus the node
density for all spreading factors SF in the Rayleigh fading
case.

We use the Hata model [9] to determine a suitable value for the
path-loss exponent β. In this model the path-loss in dB at distance
r is (44.9 − 6.55 log10 (h B )) log10 (r ) where h B is the height of the
base station antenna in meters. We assume that the height of the
base station antenna is 30 m and obtain the path-loss function
35.22 log10 (r ) in dB. Thus we choose β = 3.5. We assume the path
loss constant to be κ = 0.5. Our default assumption regarding
propagation effects is Rayleigh fading of mean 1. With this choice
2Γ(2/β )
we have E(F 2/β ) = β . However, in Section 5.3 we shall also
consider the no-fading case and log-normal shadowing.
We assume that all nodes transmit with power Ptr = 10 dBm.
Other LoRa parameters are specified in Table 3.
Note that we have N = 7 different values of the spreading factor SF
(running from 6 to 12). The packet and preamble transmission
times Bn and ∆n , n = 1, . . . , 7, corresponding to these values are
calculated using the expressions presented in Section 3.3.

Let us assume received power thresholds (sensitivities) for different
spreading factors as in Table 1. That is, P1 , . . . , P7 expressed in
dBm are as in the right column of this table from bottom to top
(P1 = 10−13.7 dBm, P2 = 10−13.5 dBm, etc, P 7 = 10−12.1 dBm and the
corresponding values of the spreading factor are SF1 = 12, SF2 = 12,
etc, S 7 = 6). Using the expressions given in Proposition 4.2 we calculate the probability of successful reception Πn of packets receiving
with powers in successive intervals [Pn , Pn+1 ), n = 1, . . . , 7. These
probabilities, calculated assuming Rayleigh fading, are shown in Figure 2. Note that increasing SF values correspond to nodes received
with smaller powers, thus located statistically in larger distances to
the base station. (When some fading is assumed then this relation
is not a deterministic function of the distance.) We observe that, up
to the density of N nodes = 2000 nodes in the disk of radius 8 km, all
transmissions have a very high reception probability (close to 1),
except for the three weakest power categories (SF = 10, 11, 12).

0.6
0.55
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Number of nodes

5.1

5

Reception probabilities

Equalizing reception probabilities for all
nodes

We assume the density of nodes corresponding to N nodes = 1000.
Using the results of Section 4.2.2, we calculate modified values of
the sensitivity which allow all nodes to have the same reception
probability equal to Π ≈ 0.95. These modified sensitivities are
presented in Table 4, where we also recall the values recommended
by the provider of LoRa technology. Observe that for SF = 7, 8, 9
we obtain the values smaller than these recommended by LoRa
provider, whereas for SF = 10, 11, 12 we obtain bigger values. Note
that the reception probabilities for these two groups in case of the
recommended configuration are, respectively, larger and smaller
than the target value Π = 0.95. Note also that the smallest modified
sensitivity is −135 dBm > −137dBm, which means that we will not
be able to receive packets with some small powers still acceptable for
the original configuration, unless we decrease the target reception
probability Π.

SF
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

Probability of success versus number of nodes
1
0.95
0.9
Probability of success

5.2

0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
No fading
Raleigh
log-normal

0.55
0.5
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Number of nodes

Figure 3: Impact of the propagation effects on the probability of successful transmission of the weakest transmissions
(SF = 12). Log-normal variance is taken σ = 2dB.

Sensitivity in dBm
equalizing reception LoRa recommended
-121
-121
-124
-126
-127
-129
-130
-131
-133
-133
-134
-135
-135
-137

network with some random propagation effects is equivalent to
a sparser network without propagation effects, cf [4] and hence
generates smaller interference,.

Table 4: Sensitivities equalizing reception probabilities to
Π ≈ 0.95 for all spreading factors in the network of density N nodes = 1000 nodes in the radius of 8 km, compared to
the sensitivities recommended by LoRa technology provider.
Note that −135 > −137, and thus packets with some small
powers are lost with respect to the original configuration.

5.3

0.85

5.4

Effect of decaying density of nodes

Finally we consider a non-homogeneous distribution of nodes,
which we assume decreasing with the distance r to the base station as the function λs r −1/5 . Here λs and all LoRa parametres
are assumed as in Section 5.1. We use the results of Section 4.2.3
to compute the probability of successful transmission for various
spreading factors. The results are shown in Figure 4. We observe
a very significant improvement and equalization of the probabilities of success for all categories of transmissions, with all values
presented being bigger than 0.9.

Effect of the fading law

Now, we study the influence of the propagation effects modeled by
the distribution of F . We consider three cases: no fading i.e. F ≡ 1,
Rayleigh fading of mean 1 (exponential F ) and log-normal fading
of mean 1 (F = exp(−σ 2 /2 + σZ ) with Z standard normal). In our
model this distribution impacts the results only via its moment
E(F 2/β ). Recall that

6

COMPARISON TO ALOHA

Performance of LoRa can be compared to that of the classical, nonslotted Aloha. This can be done assuming the same Poisson rain
model of packet transmissions. Let us briefly recall Aloha model
assumptions and results obtained in [7] (the context being that of
sensors sending packets to a sink-node).


1
when no fading,




for Rayleigh fading,
E(F ) = 2Γ( β2 )/β


 exp(σ 2 (2 − β)/β 2 for log-normal shadowing.

In Figure 3 we show how these three different cases of propagation
effects impact the probability of successful transmission of the
weakest transmissions, that is using the spreading factor SF = 12.
We observe that the performance of this category of transmissions
is slightly improved by random propagation effects. This can be
generalized to all transmissions using Jensen’s inequality E(F 2/β ) ≤
(E(F ))2/β = 1 (recall β > 2, E(F ) = 1) and observing that the
2/β

6.1

Aloha SINR collision model

In Aloha system the base station needs to be synchronized before
receiving a packet. This can be done when the base station is not
locked on a different packet at the given packet arrival time. If
this condition is satisfied, the base station starts and continues
receiving the packet until the end of the transmission. However,
the transmission may be lost because of the interference created by
other packet emissions started during the reception, in which case
the error will be detected only at the end of the reception. (These
6

be factorized as follows

Probability of success versus number of nodes
1
0.99
0.98
Probability of success

d(x)
Π0 ,
1 + λB x
1 is the (well known Erlang’s formula for the) probawhere 1+λB
bility that the packet finds the base station idle (ready to lock on
the transmission) when it arrives, d(x) is the probability that it is
not dropped by the admission policy, and Πx0 is the conditional
probability that it is correctly received (SINR condition satisfied),
given the base station starts receiving it. Explicit evaluation of
Πx0 requires a fine analysis of the interference (averaged over the
reception period) from different types of packets: non-admissible
(too weak power to lock on) and admissible ones arriving before
and during the current reception. Assuming Rayleigh fading, Πx0
can be expressed using the Laplace transforms of these components
of the interference and of the noise, as shown in [7, Fact 3.2 with the
Laplace transforms given by (9.1), (9.2), (9.3)]. These formulas and
their approximations developed in [7] allow one to solve various
optimization problems regarding Πx with respect to the packet
admission policy d(x).
A detailed comparison of the performance of LoRa and Aloha
using the Poisson rain framework is left for future work.
Πx =

0.97
0.96
0.95
0.94
SF=12
SF=11
SF=10
SF=9
SF=8
SF=7
SF=6

0.93
0.92
0.91
0

200

400

600

800

1000

1200

1400

1600

1800

2000

Number of nodes

Figure 4: Probabilities of successful transmission in an inhomogeneous network with spatial density of nodes decaying with the distance to the base station as r −1/5 .

7
interfering packets will be lost as well since the base station was
not idle to lock on them at their arrival epochs.)

6.2

CONCLUSION

We have presented a simple model to study the performance of
the node-to-base-station link in a realistic, spatial deployment of
a LoRa network, which is a type of low-power, wide-area technology destined for the Internet of Things. Crucial components
of the model are the space-time Poisson process of packet transmissions (called in the literature the Poisson rain model) and a
packet collision model accounting for LoRa intra-technology interference treatment, which has already been validated with respect
to measurements in laboratory conditions. Our model allows for
an explicit optimization of the packet reception probabilities with
respect to numerous LoRa parameters, taking into account possibly
non-homogeneous node deployment on the plane and various types
of wireless channel propagation effects. In particular, it sheds light
on how the, crucial to LoRa technology, link budget thresholds
(called sensitivities) impact the performance of different categories
of transmissions. We have studied only one base-station scenario;
extensions to multi-base station networks are left for future work. A
fair comparison of LoRa to non-slotted Aloha within the proposed
framework is also possible and desirable.

Packet admission policy

In order to improve Aloha efficiency, a packet admission policy is
introduced. Once the base station detects a packet transmission
it may decide to receive or ignore the detected packet according
to some (possibly randomized) packet admission policy, based, for
example, on the received power. The idea is to allow the base station
to ignore some very weak packets, whose successful reception is
hardly likely, as well as to drop some fraction of very strong packets
(which will be transmitted at another time) in order to let the base
station be more often available for packets with a moderate received
power. In the model proposed and studied in [7] this admission
policy took a form of the probability d(x) of packet drop (even if the
base station is available) applied for packets sent from the location
x on the plane. For a given path-loss model it can be related to the
mean received power. It was shown how to optimize it so as to
maximize the coverage or total throughput in the network.

REFERENCES
6.3

Aloha model analysis

[1] 2013. SX 1272/3/6/7/8: LoRa Modem Designer’s Guide.
[2] 2017. SX1272/73 - 860 MHz to 1020 MHz Low Power Long Range Transceiver.
Data sheet. Rev 3.1. http://www.semtech.com/images/datasheet/sx1272.pdf.
[3] Bart lomiej B laszczyszyn, Martin Haenggi, Paul Keeler, and Sayandev Mukherjee.
2018. Stochastic geometry analysis of cellular networks. Cambridge University
Press.
[4] B. B laszczyszyn and Holger Paul Keeler. 2013. Equivalence and comparison of
heterogeneous cellular networks. In Proc. of PIMRC/WDN-CN.
[5] Bartlomiej Blaszczyszyn and Paul Muhlethaler. 2010. Stochastic analysis of
non-slotted Aloha in wireless ad-hoc networks. In INFOCOM, 2010 Proceedings
IEEE. IEEE, 1–9.
[6] Bar lomiej B laszczyszyn and Paul Mühlethaler. 2015. Interference and SINR
coverage in spatial non-slotted Aloha networks. Annals of TelecommunicationsAnnales des Télécommunications 70, 7-8 (2015), 345–358.
[7] Bartlomiej Blaszczyszyn and Bozidar Radunovic. 2008. Using transmit-only
sensors to reduce deployment cost of wireless sensor networks. In INFOCOM
2008. The 27th Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE. IEEE, 1202–1210.

Assuming the same Poisson rain model of packet transmission as
used in the present paper, with Rayleigh fading, the above Aloha
SINR collision model, and some arbitrary probabilistic packet admission policy, it is possible to express the probability of successful
reception of packets versus the transmission location x on the plane.
The analysis is however more complicated than that of LoRa due to
a more complicated (detailed) SINR collision model.
More specifically, denoting by λ the space-time density of transmissions, B packet transmission time (the same for all transmissions), the probability of successful reception of a packet transmitted from location x, by the base station located at the origin, can
7

[8] Martin C. Bor, Utz Roedig, Thiemo Voigt, and Juan M. Alonso. 2016. Do LoRa LowPower Wide-Area Networks Scale?. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM International
Conference on Modeling, Analysis and Simulation of Wireless and Mobile Systems
(MSWiM ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 59–67. https://doi.org/10.1145/2988287.
2989163
[9] M. Hata. 1980. Empirical Formula for Propagation Loss in Land Mobile Radio
Services. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology 29, 3 (1980), 317–325.
[10] Ingrid Moerman Jetmir Haxhibeqiri, Floris Van den Abeele and Jeroen Hoebeke.
2017. LoRa Scalability: A Simulation Model Based on Interference Measurements.
Sensors (Basel) (2017), 1193.
[11] Juha Petaejaejaervi K. Mikhaylov and T. Haenninen. 2016. Analysis of Capacity
and Scalability of the LoRa Low Power Wide Area Network Technology. In
European Wireless 2016; 22th European Wireless Conference. 1–6.
[12] Tara Petrić, Mathieu Goessens, Loutfi Nuaymi, Alexander PELOV, and Laurent
Toutain. 2016. Measurements, Performance and Analysis of LoRa FABIAN, a
real-world implementation of LPWAN. In PIMRC 2016 : 27th Annual International
Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications. Valencia,
Spain. https://hal-imt.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01331966

8

