1
Enhancements of IEEE802.15.4e DSME Model of Wireless Sensor Networks
Sameer K. Alsudany, Student Member, IEEE, Said Boussakta, Senior Member, IEEE and Martin Johnston, Member, IEEE
School of Engineering, Newcastle University, UK E-mail: {s.k.k.alsudany1, said.boussakta, martin.johnston}@ncl.ac.uk

Abstract—Internet embedded sensor nodes have attracted the attention of researchers and industry due to their wide application. The main standard, IEEE802.15.4e 2012, introduces a deterministic and synchronous multi-channel extension (DSME) model. Three main issues should be tackled and improved with this model; a high energy consumption of end nodes during the contention access period (CAP), a long association and guaranteed time slot (GTS) earning times during a network initialization phase and a long network discovery time. These issues have been analysed and improved in a star topology wireless sensor network (WSN). Four scenarios with different numbers of nodes are investigated. Nodes numbers are set according to network saturation ratios (25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%). This paper proposes three enhancements for the performance of this model. Two new approaches are proposed to reduce the energy consumption of end nodes during the CAP period, a new association scheme during network initialization phase using a tight TDMA algorithm to minimize the time required for association and getting a GTS slot and reduce power consumption due to collisions, and a new technique to reduce network discovery time. Simulation results show signiﬁcant improvements in reducing energy consumption and radio duty cycle (RDC) of end nodes by a factor of (71) and (77) respectively. Good improvements are also achieved in reducing association and GTS earning times by a factor of (8) on average. Finally, network discovery time has been reduced for fast association and further energy saving of end nodes.
Index terms— DSME, GTS, IEEE 802.15.4-e, MAC scheduling, multi-superframe, wake-up command, WSN.
I. INTRODUCTION
S MART sensor nodes can be deployed in different areas to construct a wireless sensor network (WSN). They can be utilized in different applications such as environmental monitoring, the military and healthcare sectors and industrial automation [1]. Nowadays, WSNs have become one of the main feeders of information to the Internet, especially since the emergence of the IoT (Internet of Things) [2] and the feasibility of transferring IPv6 packets over the medium access control (MAC) frame [3] using the 6LoWPAN adaptation layer [4]. Researchers in this ﬁeld face various challenges due to the speciﬁc characteristics of sensor nodes. The limited energy source (battery-operated), low data rates, short-range communication, channel fading and interference and production costs are the main issues.
The popular standard IEEE 802.15.4 [5] represents the main infrastructure for the physical and MAC layers. Recently, the introduction of the newly amended IEEE 802.15.4e-2012 [6] has improved performance in terms of radio frequency (RF) link reliability, network capacity,

packet latency and guarantees and determinism in packet transmission. Different superframe and slot frame structures, channel diversity modes (channel hopping and channel adaptation) and fast association, among others, are the main improvements achieved with the new amendment.
One of the main challenges of a WSN with a long lifetime is the energy consumption. Different components inside a sensor node can consume energy, but the main culprit is the wireless communication transceiver compared to other parts such as processing unit and memory. Sometimes, transmitting a single bit can consume as much as 1000 times the power utilized to compute a single instruction [7]. As the network operates, node energy is depleted and, as nodes become drained of energy, the coverage area begins to shrink and eventually the network becomes useless [8]. Therefore, power optimization is crucial in extending network lifetime.
The DSME model extends the legacy standard by reconﬁguring the superframe structure and introducing channel diversity modes. It divides the superframe into a beacon slot, contention access period (CAP) and a contention-free period (CFP). Moreover, the beacon interval is divided into groups of superframes called a multi-superframe structure. According to the requirements of IEEE802.15.4-e, end nodes (battery-operated) inside the DSME network should keep their receivers ON during the CAP period, which can lead to higher energy consumption. Therefore, this issue should be addressed and optimized.
In the DSME network initialization phase, each node should associate with a PAN (Personal Area Network) coordinator and apply to earn a guaranteed time slot (GTS) before the beginning of transmitting its data. Nodes access their medium using a slotted CSMA-CA algorithm in which the number of collisions may increase for more than one reason. The main two reasons are, ﬁrstly, collisions that occur among different packets within the same process since nodes may transmit their commands packets at the same time. Different packets are transmitted in the association process such as association request, association response and acknowledgement packets.
In a GTS process, packets such as GTS request, GTS response, GTS notiﬁcation and acknowledgements of different packets may be transmitted simultaneously and lead to more collisions. Secondly, interleaving between the association and GTS phases of different nodes may cause further collisions. When a node joins a network, it can ask for a GTS while other nodes are still in the association or GTS phases. Therefore the association and GTS long times during

978-1-5386-4646-5/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

426

ICUFN 2018

2

a network initialization especially in a network with a large number of nodes should be addressed and minimized.
The standard proposes that end nodes should scan the entire channels to discover a network and join it. This scan process can lead to a long waiting period and more energy consumption especially with a long beacon interval, therefore this long time should be addressed and minimized.
A. Contribution of this paper
This paper proposes three enhancements to the IEEE802.15.4e DSME model. The main contributions of our schemes can be summarized as follows:
1) Proposing two new approaches to control end nodes’ receivers to reduce their energy consumption in a DSME network.
2) Proposing a new scheme to minimize the long time required for association and GTS earning processes during the initialization phase of a DSME network.
3) Proposing a new technique for network discovery.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: relevant previous work is discussed in section II. Section III gives a brief background of the IEEE802.15.4e- DSME model. Section IV describes the main functions and enhancements of the proposed schemes. The implementation and analysis are given in section V. Results and discussion are presented in section VI. Finally, the conclusions and outcomes are indicated in section VII.
II. RELATED WORK Capone et al. [9] proposed three enhancements for the IEEE802.15.4 DSME model (Enhancement for Low-Power Instrumentation DSME Applications, ELPIDA). The ﬁrst is the CAP wake-up in which an end node’s transceiver is turned off during the CAP period. Secondly, since most trafﬁc is sink-oriented, a sensor node falls into a sleep mode during down-stream trafﬁc. Finally, a beacon lookup is used to overcome the clock jitter problem that affects end node’s synchronization with the sink node. However, the CAP wake-up technique is not ﬂexible enough to support different MAC wake-up schedules because it depends mainly on a single control bit (the frame pending ﬁeld of the frame control of the enhanced beacon (EB)) to control the MAC duty cycle of end nodes. Also, it has a restriction when a coordinator node has data pending to its end nodes as it cannot use this ﬁeld to inform these end nodes about pending data kept at the coordinator. Sahoo et al. [10] proposed new methods for channel access and beacon scheduling to reduce network discovery time and energy consumption. Also, a new dynamic slot allocation for guaranteed retransmission and medium CCA implementation were proposed. The new channel access and beacon scheduling depend mainly on transmitting beacon frames in each superframe on different channels. Each node chooses a random channel to receive a beacon. This will partition nodes into different groups to access the medium in different superframes in the association process, thus leading to reduce number of collisions, association delay time and power consumption. Juc et al. [11] analysed and compared the performance of two models of the IEEE 802.15.4 e standard; Time Slotted

 



!"#$%"#&%"#'





















   

   

 



























  

 


 




Fig. 1: DSME multi-super frame structure.

Channel Hopping (TSCH) and DSME. Three parameters were assessed in this analysis: energy consumption, throughput and transmission delay time. The results showed that, in low duty cycle applications, TSCH obtains higher throughput, shorter delay and lower power consumption. Meanwhile, DSME exhibits higher throughput, shorter delay and lower power consumption for high duty cycle applications.
Alderisi et al. [12] presented a performance assessment for two models of the IEEE 802.15.4e standard: DSME and TSCH. The performance metrics were delay, reliability and scalability. Both protocols were proven to be robust against channel noise because of using multi-channel transmission technique; therefore, both can be considered as reliable protocols.
In [13], the relevance of IEEE 802.11ah and 802.15.4 in the context of IoT is examined, considering their various key aspects. Performances of both technologies in terms of association time, throughput and end-to-end delay are evaluated and compared, assuming realistic scenarios with a signiﬁcantly large number of devices.

III. BACKGROUND ON THE IEEE 802.15.4E-DSME
MODEL
In the DSME-enabled network, a PAN coordinator node transmits an EB every beacon interval (BI) to synchronize nodes with the superframe structure. Every beacon is broadcasted with a DSME PAN DESCRIPTOR IE (Information Element) which describes different parameters of the EB.
The DSME model can be considered as an enhanced and extended mode of the legacy IEEE 802.15.4 standard, as shown in Fig. 1. It enhances the performance of the legacy standard by utilizing the new multi-superframe structure, channel diversity, CAP reduction and group acknowledgements. The multi-superframe structure depends mainly on three parameters:

1) Superframe order (SO), which deﬁnes the length of the superframe duration (SD):
SD = aBaseSuperf rameDuration × 2SO (1)
2) Multi-super frame order (MO), which deﬁnes the multi-superframe duration (MD):
M D = aBaseSuperf rameDuration × 2MO (2)
3) Beacon Order (BO), which deﬁnes the duration between every two consecutive beacons transmitted by a PAN coordinator (BI): BI = aBaseSuperf rameDuration × 2BO (3)

427

3


 







 


   

 





!"#$%"#&%"#'


  "






                

Fig. 2: Wake-up command structure.


 


 



These three parameters are related to each other according

to:

0 SO M O BO 14

(4)

Each superframe consists of 16 slots with equal size. Nine slots constitute the CAP period and seven slots form the CFP period. Therefore, a maximum of 7 devices can transmit during each superframe duration.
The multi-superframe structure is used for data transmission repetition. Therefore, every node can transmit every multi-superframe. EBs are transmitted at the start of slot 0 and repeated every beacon interval (BI). Commands frames are transmitted during the CAP period while data frames are transmitted during the CFP period.
In the DSME model, a node can follow ﬁve phases during its lifetime; network discovery, network association, GTS earning, data transmission and network disconnection.

IV. ENHANCEMENTS OF IEEE802.15.4E DSME MODEL
Our system model enhances the performance of the IEEE802.15.4e DSME standard in more than one respect as follows:

   








Fig. 3: Data phase: (a) Std. model, (b) Enh. model.



 "




 

 !

$

 


#



$


 #






  

 #
 

$#





!

    % &%

Fig. 4: Nodes’ Association and GTS processes during an initialization phase.

A. Energy saving
The enhancement is related to the power consumption of end nodes during the CAP period of the EB superframes. As stated by the standard, end nodes should keep their receivers in the ON state during the CAP period. Therefore, two approaches have been developed to save nodes energy during the CAP period:
1) The CAP wake-up command: this approach is more ﬂexible than others as it deﬁnes the wake-up time (ON) state per superframe inside a multi-superframe structure starting from the ﬁrst superframe. The command structure consists of the following ﬁelds: (Fig. 2)
a) Command Frame Identiﬁer (0x1d): this is selected from the IDs that are reserved by the standard.
b) Number of superframes: this deﬁnes the number of superframes inside each multi-super frame starting from the ﬁrst one for the node’s receiver to be in the ON state in the CAP period.
2) Control bit: Our proposed approach uses a reserved bit (unlike ELPIDA which uses the frame pending bit) in the same frame control ﬁeld of the EB to implement the CAP wake-up. In this approach, end nodes turn their receivers OFF in all CAPs except in the beacon and the GTS slots when the control bit equals zero. When it is one, nodes turn their receivers ON in all CAPs.
Fig. 3(a) depicts a node in a data transmission phase with the standard model, while Fig. 3(b) depicts the same node

in the proposed enhanced model using the CAP wake-up command with number of superframes ﬁeld equals zero.
B. A New medium access scheme during the DSME network initialization phase
A tight TDMA algorithm is used to solve the two mentioned issues and minimize association and GTS earning times. The whole end nodes of a fully saturated network use only one beacon to implement these two processes and transfer its operation to the data transmission phase.
Fig. 4 depicts two nodes that associate and get GTSs slots consecutively after receiving a network discovery beacon. Each node performs the two processes successively. Therefore, collisions will be minimized signiﬁcantly since nodes transmit their requests sequentially within their offset times. Any node fails to associate or earn a GTS slot, it can use the slotted CSMA-CA algorithm in the next beacons. After the network initialization phase is ﬁnished, nodes can use the slotted CSMA-CA algorithm to transfer their commands packets for network management.
C. A new DSME network discovery technique
In the standard model, nodes discover the DSME network through scanning the entire channels and receiving valid EBs from the PAN coordinator which can take long time. To minimize network discovery time, EBs are broadcasted with a ﬁxed predeﬁned channel and nodes are pre-conﬁgured with this channel before their deployment in a targeted area, so nodes can discover the network by receiving its ﬁrst beacon from the PAN coordinator. Nodes that are unknown to the

428

4

TABLE I: Simulation Parameters

Parameter
OS Module Topology Scenarios (No. of nodes) No. of channels SO, MO, BO Running time No. of runs Payload Data trafﬁc Seed number generator Transceiver
Mote

Value
Contiki 2.7 - Cooja Sim. Rime stack Star
14, 28, 42, and 56 16
3, 6, 7 1200s
50 6 bytes Every multi-superframe Contiki seed number CC2420 SKY mote

network can scan the entire channels. V. IMPLEMENTATION AND ANALYSIS

The performance of the three models (the standard model, the work of Sahoo et al. [10] model and our enhanced model) has been investigated using the Contiki OS [14] with simulations conducted by the Cooja network simulator [15]. The test-bed of each sensor node is composed of a sky mote and the CC2420 transceiver [16]. Power trace tool [17] has been utilized to assess both models. Different scenarios were implemented with a star sensor network topology with (SO = 3, MO = 6 and BO = 7) and different numbers of nodes according to different newtork saturation ratios (14 (25%), 28 (50%), 42 (75%), and 56 (100%)). Table I describes the simulation parameters.
The CAP reduction enhancement is implemented using the CAP wake-up command with the number of superframes ﬁeld equals zero, so all nodes keep their receivers OFF in a whole beacon interval (BI) except at the end of the EB for a beacon synchronization, beacon slot and its GTS for data transmission. The command is sent by the PAN coordinator after end nodes join the network.
The second enhancement uses the TDMA algorithm described in algorithm (1) to avoid collisions and get a perfect synchronization among different nodes in the network initialization phase, thus minimizing association and GTS earning times signiﬁcantly. After that, end nodes go to a sleep mode except for a beacon synchronization and data transfer. Our algorithm proves that all end nodes within a full saturated network with a basic multi-superframe structure and thus for any other multi-superframe structure can associate and get GTSs within one beacon interval. According to the speciﬁcation of the IEEE802.15.4e with a data transfer rate of (250 Kb/s, symbol rate of 62500 symbol/s):

minGT S = aBaseSlotDuration × 2SO Rs

(5)

Where, Rs is the symbol rate. For minGT S, SO equals 0 and aBaseSlotDuration equals 60 symbols. Therefore,

minGT S equals 0.96ms. The time duration required to

transmit a full data packet with its acknowledgement can

be found using (6):

GT S(data) = maxTpacket + Tack Rs

(6)

Where, maxTpacket is the maximum physical packet size of the IEEE802.15.4e standard and equals (133 bytes (266 symbols), for the 2.4 GHz band, 1 byte equals 2 symbols) and Tack is the time duration required to transmit an acknowledgement frame after receiving a data packet.

Tack

=

aU nitbackof f period

+ Tta + SHR + P HR + ACK Rs

(7)

Where, Tta (turn around) is the time required to switch the node transceiver from Rx to Tx and vice versa and corresponds to aT urnarroundT ime (12 symbols), SHR
is the physical synchronization header and corresponds to phySHRDuration (5 bytes), P HR is the physical header (1 byte) and ACK is the acknowledgement frame (5 bytes). Tack = 20 + 12 + 5 × 2 + 6 × 2 = 54 symbols. GT S(data) = 266 + 54 = 320 symbols = 5.12ms. To transmit one full data packet with its acknowledgement, minGT S > GT S(data) → 0.96ms×2SO > 5.12ms. SO = 3, minGT S = 0.96 × 23 = 7.68ms > GT S(data).
In the DSME network, data transmission periodicity
should be maintained by using a multi-superframe structure [6]. At least, two multi-superframe within a beacon interval should be utilized, SD = 16 × 7.68ms= 122.88ms and minBI = SD × 2 = 245.7ms. Where, (minBI) is the minimum beacon interval that consists of two multi-superframe with a single superframe (SD) in each multi-superframe structure (SO = 3, M O = 3 and BO = 4) and transmit a full data packet of (133 bytes) with
its acknowledgement in one GTS. For a full saturated network, a maximum of (7) devices
can transmit their data within each minBI (one superframe
for main data packet and one for data packet transmission periodicity). The time duration required by a node to asso-
ciate and get a GTS slot using the TDMA algorithm (Fig.(4)) can be found using (8):

Tag = Tareq + 3 × Tack + 4 × Tlifs + Tares

(8)

+ Tgreq + Tgreply + Tta + Tgnotif y + Tguard

Where: Tareq is the time required to send an association request from a node to a PAN coordinator. Tares is the time required to send an association response from a PAN coordinator to a node. Tgreq is the time required to send a GTS request from a node to a PAN coordinator. Tgreply is the time required to broadcast a GTS reply from a PAN coordinator to a whole network . Tgnotify is the time required to broadcast a GTS notiﬁcation from a node to a whole network. Tlifs is the time duration of a long interframe space to process a packet and corresponds to macM inLIF SP eriod. Tguard is a guard time between any two consecutive nodes to implement a full association and GTS processes. Therefore,

Tag = 2 × 28 + 2 × 3 × 54 + 2 × 4 × 40 + 2 × 45 + 2 × 21 + 2 × 21 + 2 × 12 + 2 × 21 + 75 = 1015 symbols = 16.24ms.

Therefore, minBI(245ms) > 7 × Tag(113.68ms) and the

429

5

Algorithm 1 TDMA algorithm for the DSME model

1: function CALCULATE TIME OF ASSOCIATION

2:

Inputs ← Tareq, Tares, Tgreq, Tgreply, Tgnotify,

3:

Tlifs, Tack, Tta, Tguard

4: Calculate: Tag, Txag using (8) & (9) 5: Return: Txag 6: end function

7: loop:

8: if network discovery beacon is received then

9: Call ”Calculate Time of Association”.

10: Implement Association & GTS processes (Fig.4)

11: Switch to sleep mode and wake up only for beacon

12: synchronization.

13: else

14: goto loop.

15: end if

16: Wait for next beacons to start data transmission.

End nodes' energy consumption (J)

104

103

102

101 100 10-1
0

Enh.14 Enh.28 Enh.42 Enh.56 Std.14 Std.28 Std.42 Std.56

200

400

600

800 1000 1200

Time (s)

Fig. 5: Accumulated end nodes’ energy consumption.

TDMA algorithm can be utilized efﬁciently as a network

initialization technique in a multi-superframe structure of a

full saturated DSME network. For a tight synchronization,

each node should exactly calculate the starting time of its

association process inside the network discovery beacon as

in (9):

Txag = Tag × (Nid − 1)

(9)

Where, Txag is the beginning of node’s association process and Nid is the node address.

VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This paper focuses on three network performances; end nodes’ energy consumption and their RDCs, association and GTS earning times in a network initialization phase, and network discovery time.
The CAP disabling scheme improves end nodes’ energy consumption and their RDCs signiﬁcantly using the CAP wake-up command approach to schedule the access of end nodes to the medium.
At the end of the simulation’s running time (1200s), the whole end nodes of the standard model for the four scenarios (nodes 14, 28, 42, and 56) consume energy about 534J, 1090J, 1636J and 2148J respectively. Meanwhile, end nodes of the enhanced model deplete 7.15J, 15.25J, 23.2J and 31.2J respectively. Therefore, energy consumption is minimized by a factor of 71 on average, (see Fig. 5).
The second enhancement minimizes the association and a GTS earning times signiﬁcantly by using the proposed TDMA algorithm. Using the slotted CSMA algorithm in the standard DSME model can increase the association and GTS times as nodes should compete for each other to get access to the medium during the CAP portion of each superframe (not a whole superframe duration) which increases the probability of collisions and, accordingly, increases the delay time of association or getting a GTS slot and leads to more energy consumption. The proposed model shows an improvement in minimizing the accumulative association and GTS times for the four different scenarios as compared to the other two models (the standard model and the work of [10] model) and as shown in Fig. 6. It spends about (0.28s, 0.56s, 0.84s and 1.12s) respectively. Meanwhile, the standard model spends

Fig. 6: Accumulated end nodes’ association + GTS times.
about (2.4s, 4.1s, 7s and 9.5s) and the work of [10] spends about (2.3s, 4s, 6.8s and 9.38s). Therefore, association and GTS times are reduced by a factor of (8) on average. It is also clear that the other two models have spent about the same times since the numbers of collisions of the two models depend mainly on the number of nodes that access the medium at the same time and the duration of the superframe CAP. The Long CAP period minimizes the number of collisions and leads to about the same performance.
The third enhancement (network discovery technique) has its impact on minimizing network discovery time which leads to more energy saving and less network joining time. Fig.(7) depicts the improvement in network discovery time among the three models. The proposed technique minimizes network discovery time signiﬁcantly since it can discover the EB of the PAN coordinator in the ﬁrst valid beacon. Using three settings for the beacon order (6, 7, and 8); the network discovery time of whole nodes of the proposed technique is the same (6ms). Meanwhile, the work of [10] has spent ﬁxed time about (1.96s). Its discovery time depends mainly on the value of the (SD) and the number of channels used to broadcast the EBs.
The highest network discovery time is consumed by the standard model (15.7s, 31.45s and 62.9s) respectively. It depends on the value of (BI) and the number of scanned channels by end nodes to discover the EBs.
Regarding end nodes’ RDCs, the proposed model has the lowest RDC due to the effect of the three enhancements

430

6

Fig. 7: Network discovery time (CHs=16 and SO=3) 102

as the other two models use a slotted CSMA-CA algorithm. The proposed model introduces a new association and GTS earning mechanism in which a TDMA algorithm is implemented to separate the association and GTSs earning processes of consecutive nodes. Simulation results show a high minimization in these times by a factor of (8). The third issue which is a long network discovery time has been solved by using a new technique in which EBs are transmitted with a ﬁxed pre-deﬁned channel and end nodes are pre-conﬁgured with this channel during the pre-deployment process, thus end nodes can discover a network within the ﬁrst valid EB. Simulation results show a high reduction in network discovery time of the proposed model as compared to the other two models. Ongoing and our future work includes investigating mobility of nodes inside the IEEE802.1.5.4-e DSME network.

End nodes' average RDC (%)

Enh.14

Enh.28

101

Enh.42 Enh.56

Std.14

Std.28

Std.42

Std.56

100

10-1 0

200 400 600 800 1000 1200 Time (s)

Fig. 8: Nodes’ radio duty cycle (RDC)

as each one of them reduces the ON time of end nodes’ receivers. Meanwhile, the accumulative RDC drops down after a very short period of operation to achieve very low values at the simulation end; 0.79%, 0.67%, 0.75% and 0.78% respectively. In contrast, the RDC of the standard model remains high in the network initialization phase and for a long period as compared to the proposed model due to a long channels scanning period and association and GTS earning times. After that, it decreases to reach about half its value at the initialization phase; 57.58%, 57.54%, 57.6% and 57.54% respectively. Therefore, the average RDCs of the four scenarios are reduced by a factor of 77 on average, (see Fig. 8).

VII. CONCLUSION
This paper considers three aspects related to the IEEE802.15.4e DSME model and introduces an enhancement to them. Three models are investigated; the standard model, the work of [10] and our enhanced model. The ﬁrst issue is the energy consumption of end nodes during the CAP period which has been reduced by introducing two new approaches. One is more ﬂexible and uses a new proposed wake-up command that can control end node’s receiver within every superframe inside a multi-superframe structure. Simulation results exhibit a signiﬁcant reduction in energy consumption of end nodes by a factor of (71) as compared to the standard model. The second drawback is a long association and GTS earning times of end nodes during the network initialization phase

REFERENCES
[1] S. Yang, ”Wireless Sensor Networks, Principles, Design and Applications”, Springer London Heidelberg New York Dordrecht, USA: Springer, 2014.
[2] J. Marique, J. Reuda and J. Portocarrero, “Contrasting Internet of Things and Wireless Sensor Network from a Conceptual Overview ” , Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data (SmartData),Dec. 2016.
[3] S. Alsudany, S. Boussakta, and M. Johnston, “A Dynamic ContextBased Header Compression Algorithm for 6LoWPAN Networks ” , IEEE International Conference on Sensing, Communication and Networking (SECON Workshops), June 2016, pp. 1–6
[4] J. Hui, P. Thubert, ”Compression Format for IPv6 Datagrams over IEEE 802.15.4-Based Networks”, IETF document, RFC 6282, Sep. 2011
[5] ”IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks -Part 15.4: Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs)”, pp. 1–314, May 2011.
[6] ”IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Part 15.4: Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs) Amendment 1: MAC Sublayer, IEEE Standard 802.15.4e-2012”, 2012, pp. 1–225.
[7] P. Alexandre, C. da Silva and Neves, “Internet Protocol over Wireless Sensor Networks, from Myth to Reality ” , Journal of Communications. Vol. 5, March 2010), pp. 189-196.
[8] T. Hailum, “Maximizing Network Lifetime in Energy-constrained Wireless Sensor Network ” , Int. Conf. on communication and Mobile Computing, Vancouver, Canada, 2006, pp. 1091-1096.
[9] S. Capone and R. Brama and F. Ricciato and G. Boggia and A. Malvasi, “Modeling and simulation of energy efcient enhancements for IEEE 802.15.4e DSME ” , Wireless Telecommunications Symposium, April 2014, pp.1-6.
[10] P. Sahoo, S. Pattanaik and S.Wu, “A Novel IEEE 802.15.4e DSME MAC for Wireless Sensor Networks ” , Sensors, January 2017, pp.1-25.
[11] I. Juc and O. Alphand and R. Guizzetti and M. Favre and A. Duda, “Energy consumption and performance of IEEE 802.15.4e TSCH and DSME ” , IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, April 2016, pp.1-7.
[12] G. Alderisi and G. Patti and O. Mirabella and L. L. Bello, “Simulative assessments of the IEEE 802.15.4e DSME and TSCH in realistic process automation scenarios ” , IEEE 13th International Conference on Industrial Informatics (INDIN), July 2015, pp.948-955.
[13] N. Ahmed, H. Rahman, Md.I. Hussain, “A comparison of 802.11ah and 802.15.4 for IoT ” , Elsevier, ICT Express, August 2016, pp.100102.
[14] A. Dunkels, B. Gronvall, and T. Voigt, “Contiki—A lightweight and exible operating system for tiny networked sensors ” , Annu. IEEE Int. Conf. Local Comput. Netw., Nov. 2004, pp. 455–462.
[15] F. Osterlind, A. Dunkels, J. Eriksson, N. Finne, and T. Voigt, “Crosslevel sensor network simulation with COOJ ” , in Proc. 31st IEEE Conf. Local Comput. Netw., Nov. 2006, pp. 641–648.
[16] T. Instrument, “2.4 GHz IEEE 802.15.4 / RF Transceiver”, 1999, [Online]. Available: http://www.ti.com/lit/ds/symlink/cc2420.pdf
[17] A. Dunkels, J. Eriksson, N. Finne, and A. N. Tsiftes, “Powertrace: Network-level power proling for low-power wireless networks ” , Swedish Institute of Computer Science, Campbell, CA, USA, Tech. Rep, T2011:05, 2011.

431

