This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of Things Journal
1
Software-Deﬁned Networking for Internet of Things: A Survey
Samaresh Bera, Student Member, IEEE, Sudip Misra, Senior Member, IEEE, and Athanasios V. Vasilakos, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Internet of things (IoT) facilitates billions of devices to be enabled with network connectivity to collect and exchange real-time information for providing intelligent services. Thus, IoT allows connected devices to be controlled and accessed remotely in the presence of adequate network infrastructure. Unfortunately, traditional network technologies such as enterprise networks and classic timeout-based transport protocols are not capable of handling such requirements of IoT in an efﬁcient, scalable, seamless, and cost-effective manner. Besides, the advent of software-deﬁned networking (SDN) introduces features that allow the network operators and users to control and access the network devices remotely, while leveraging the global view of the network. In this respect, we provide a comprehensive survey of different SDNbased technologies, which are useful to fulﬁll the requirements of IoT, from different networking aspects — edge, access, core, and data center networking. In these areas, the utility of SDN-based technologies is discussed, while presenting different challenges and requirements of the same in the context of IoT applications. We present a synthesized overview of the current state of IoT development. We also highlight some of the future research directions and open research issues based on the limitations of the existing SDN-based technologies.
Index Terms—Software-deﬁned networking, Internet of Things, Survey, Edge networking, Access networking, Core networking, Data center networking
I. INTRODUCTION
The traditional networking infrastructure consists of different networking devices such as switches, routers, and intermediate devices, in which application-speciﬁc integrated circuits are installed to perform dedicated tasks [1], [2]. Therefore, the devices are pre-programmed with different complex rules (i.e., protocols), which cannot be modiﬁed in real-time, to perform the dedicated tasks. Moreover, due to the resource-constrained nature of the devices, they cannot be pre-programmed with multiple rules to provide optimal network services. Consequently, traditional network technologies are incapable of adapting adequate policies to meet the application-speciﬁc requirements of IoT in real-time.
To address such limitations in the traditional networks, a new concept, known as software-deﬁned networking (SDN), is proposed. SDN is an emerging network architecture, using which network control can be decoupled from the traditional hardware devices [3]. Therefore, the main objective of the SDN is to separate the control plane from the data plane involving
S. Bera and S. Misra are with the Computer Science and Engineering Department, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 721302, India, Email: s.bera.1989@ieee.org, smisra@sit.iitkgp.ernet.in
A. V. Vasilakos is with the Lulea University of Technology, 97187, Sweden, Email: athanasios.vasilakos@ltu.se

the forwarding devices. As a result, adequate control logic can be implemented on the physical devices, depending on the application-speciﬁc requirements in real-time. In a generalized view, SDN consists of three layers — infrastructure, control, and application [4]. In addition to the layer-wise architecture of SDN, multiple application program interfaces (APIs) also exist — northbound, southbound, eastbound, and westbound. The northbound API is used to interface the application layer with the control layer, so that they can communicate with each other. Through the northbound API, the abstracted view of the network is also provided to the application layer. The southbound API is responsible for interfacing between the control and infrastructure layers, so that the controllers can deploy different rules in the forwarding devices such as routers and switches, and the latter can communicate with the controller in real-time. The eastbound and westbound APIs are responsible for interfacing between multiple controllers, so that they can take coordinated decisions. OpenFlow [5] is the most widely used protocol to enable communication between the control and data planes.
Concurrent prominent technological development of internet of things (IoT) enables different objects such as sensor nodes, embedded systems and intermediate devices to collect and exchange data toward the fulﬁllment of the objectives of fully connected world, in the near future. Typically, an IoT architecture consists of several sensor and RFID nodes forming large-scale distributed embedded systems for different realtime applications such as smart health-care [6], [7], intelligent transportation systems [8], and smart energy systems [9]–[11].
Recently, Jagadeesan et al. [12] discussed the applicability of SDN in wireless networks. The authors showed that some of the existing schemes support OpenFlow1 protocol, whereas some of them are compatible with the OpenFlow. Consequently, the authors highlighted some of the key challenges present in wireless networks, which can be addressed using the concept of SDN. Sood et al. [13] discussed different opportunities and challenges of SDN in the context of IoT, and showed that SDN-based technologies will have major impact on IoT to make it successful for a connected world. The authors discussed recent developments of wireless and optical networks to integrate SDN and IoT together. The discussion of different scopes of SDN-based approaches in IoT is limited to wireless networks. Similarly, Caraguay et al. [14] discussed different challenges and opportunities of SDN-based IoT applications. They showed that SDN-based
1OpenFLow is an SDN protocol.

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
2

solution approaches are beneﬁcial to address different challenges present in developing IoT applications compared to the conventional networking approaches. Moreover, there is a need to have a comprehensive discussion on SDN-based technologies in IoT from different networking aspects — edge, access, core, and data center networking, while presenting different challenges and requirements. Therefore, we believe that SDN-based solution approaches are capable of handling several issues and requirements of IoT. Consequently, we are motivated to explore different possibilities of SDN-based solution approaches in the context of IoT, while presenting different challenges involved in it.
Typically, an IoT network comprises of a combination of sensor and actuator networks, and end-users with smart-phones — which acts as the edge network. Further, the edge network is supported by some gateways and access points — which is termed as access network. On top of the edge and access networks, the backbone network plays a crucial role to route the sensed and actuated data to the data center network for further processing. Therefore, the data center network also plays an important role in storing and processing the sensed and actuated information. Moreover, the architecture of a data center network is different from the backbone, access, and edge networks. To present an overview of the ongoing research efforts, in this paper, we provide a systematic overview of SDN-based technologies in IoT in different networking aspects — edge, access, core, and data center networking. For edge networking, we mainly discuss how SDN-based technologies can be used in sensor networks to manage the resource of sensor nodes efﬁciently. Subsequently, we also discuss the limitation of the existing SDN-based edge networking schemes in IoT. Based on the limitations, some of the future research directions are also presented. Access networking plays an important role to aggregate the sensed information. Therefore, different SDN-based data aggregation schemes are reviewed, which can be used to address different access networking challenges in IoT, while specifying several issues involved in it. Finally, we present the challenges and requirements present in core and data center network in the context of IoT, while brieﬂy discussing the existing approaches from the aspects of IoT core and data center networks. In brief, the contributions of this paper are as follows:
• Brief overview of software-deﬁned IoT (SDIoT) is presented.
• We discuss how SDN-based technologies can be used to overcome different issues in edge, access, core, and data center networks. Consequently, we present a comprehensive survey on the existing SDN-based technologies from the aspects of IoT.
• Different potential future research directions are also presented on how the existing schemes can be extended further to address the limitations/challenges in order to have improved efﬁciency in IoT.
• Finally, we present different open research issues, which are the crucial factors need to be addressed in establishing an efﬁcient and effective IoT environment.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents an overview of software-deﬁned IoT (SDIoT)

networking, i.e., how the SDN can address different challenges and requirements of IoT applications. Sections III and IV discuss existing SDN-based schemes in IoT from four different perspectives — edge and access networking, while describing their limitations and some potential future research directions. Additionally, Sections V and VI discuss the challenges and requirements involved in core and data center networking, while presenting a comparative analysis of the existing SDNbased approaches. Section VII presents different open research issues based on the detailed synthesis of existing solution approaches discussed in Sections III – IV. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section VIII.
II. SOFTWARE-DEFINED IOT
In this Section, we present some of the key requirements of IoT applications, which can be potentially fulﬁlled by SDN technologies to realize the concept of software-deﬁned IoT.
• Network Management: It is expected that in a decade or so, billions of things will be in use worldwide through the power of IoT technology [15]–[19]. Therefore, it is evident that huge data will be generated from the devices that need to be processed in a timely and efﬁcient manner. Consequently, network management is an important factor for managing such an enormous collection of devices and the huge information generated by them. Thus, adequate technologies are required to distribute and control the trafﬁc ﬂows in the network for load balancing and minimization of network delay. Such requirements can be fulﬁlled by the SDN-based technology, as it leverages the global view of the network in a centralized manner. Thus, the SDN-based technologies can be applied for IoT network management such as load balancing, ﬁne-grained trafﬁc forwarding, and improved bandwidth utilization [20].
• Network Function Virtualization: The predeﬁned programmed nature of the traditional network technologies does not allow the devices to perform multiple tasks, although they are capable of doing so. Therefore, it is required to virtualize the functions of devices, and change them in real-time. The recently introduced the concept of network function virtualization (NFV) that allows the devices to perform multiple tasks, while changing their functions in real-time, depending on application-speciﬁc requirements [21]–[25]. Due to the separation of the control plane from the physical devices from the perspective of SDN, NFV is made easier to the Internet service providers. Consequently, SDN-based approaches play an important role in realizing the concept of NFV in a largescale IoT network [26].
• Accessing Information from Anywhere: As discussed in the above points, billions of devices are envisaged to be connected in IoT. Further, the owners of the devices should be able to access them from anywhere and at anytime, so that they are able to control and change the functions of their devices, depending on requirements, in a seamless manner [27]. It is possible to control such devices in the network with the help of SDN-based technologies, while preserving the privacy of others [28].
• Resource Utilization: Under-utilization or over-utilization may decrease the network performance, which, in turn, minimizes the network utility. Therefore, efﬁcient mapping of

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
3

users’ requests is required for improved resource utilization to maximize the utility of the network [29]. In SDN, ﬂow-rulebased trafﬁc forwarding helps in improved network resource utilization. Consequently, request from multiple users can be forwarded through the desired path according to the ﬂow-rules decided by the SDN controller [30].
• Energy Management: Huge number of data centers will be involved in processing the huge volume of data collected from billions of devices in IoT [31], [32]. Therefore, huge amount of energy will be consumed to power the data centers. Consequently, smart energy management systems also need to be ensured for energy-efﬁcient data center networking. In SDN-based data center networking, trafﬁc can be mapped to the adequate servers efﬁciently. Thus, the devices at the data center can be switched ON/OFF dynamically, depending on the requirements [33], which, in turn, establishes an energyefﬁcient data center networking. This feature can be used from the perspective of IoT network [34].
• Security and Privacy: Finally, securing the devices and network is an important consideration for allowing multiple devices, vendors, and users to participate in a single platform [35], [36]. For example, a set of devices is associated with a particular service provider. Therefore, the control of such devices should only be allowed to the particular service provider. Moreover, other service providers should not be able to get access to the data generated by the devices although they have the data. Concurrently, privacy is a major issue to the users present in an IoT network. Due to the integration of multiple devices into a single platform, multiple authorities may have the information of who is doing what, which, in turn, violates the privacy of the users. Consequently, researchers need to consider such cases in order to preserve the privacy of the users, while integrating multiple devices into a single platform. The ﬁne-grained control of ﬂows using SDN enhance security and privacy of network trafﬁc [37].
From the above mentioned facts, it is evident that SDNbased technologies will have major impact in managing the IoT network from the aspects of edge, access, core and data center networks.
Figure 1 presents a schematic view of SDN-enabled IoT architecture with edge, access, core, and data center networking. In the subsequent Sections, we discuss these networking aspects in detail with different challenges and requirements in the context of IoT applications. Further, Figure 2 presents an overview of SDN-based IoT networks aspects, which are considered in the existing works.
III. SDN-BASED EDGE NETWORKING
In this Section, we discuss the different requirements of IoT applications, and the existing approaches which are useful to address these requirements in respect of edge networking.
A. Requirements at Edge Network
In IoT, several sensors and actuators are integrated into multiple devices to monitor/measure different parameters (such as health condition). Therefore, it is necessary to gather and aggregate the sensed and actuated data from the nodes2 in an
2Combination of sensor and actuators

Fig. 1: A schematic view of software-deﬁned internet of things
Fig. 2: Overview of different aspects of SDN-based IoT networks
efﬁcient manner. We excerpt below some of the crucial issues involved in data collection in IoT.
1) Uniﬁed Information Collection from Devices: Typically, in an IoT edge network, multiple sensors and actuators, which are heterogeneous in nature, are inter-connected. Therefore, it is necessary to have adequate technologies to bridge such heterogeneity, so that the devices can communicate with one another and exchange information in a uniﬁed manner. However, the vendor-speciﬁc requirements [38] of the traditional devices do not allow them to participate into a single platform. Consequently, it is required to have a uniﬁed data collection mechanism from the sensors and actuators present in the IoT edge network.
2) Unstructured Data: As mentioned in Section III-A1, heterogeneous devices participate in a single platform. Therefore, it is evident that data format of the sensed/actuated information can be different due to the vendor-speciﬁc properties. However, the sensed/actuated information must be gathered/aggregated in a precise manner. Adequate data aggregation mechanism is also an important aspect to consider in the IoT edge networks. For example, the heterogeneous data is collected by a single aggregator, but it should be possible to extract the original data from the aggregated one.

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
4

3) Adoption of New Technologies: Another important issue in the IoT edge network is the adoption of new technologies by its users. Users always prefer new technologies to get efﬁcient QoS from their service operators [39]. As a result, devices must be supported to adopt new technologies without changing the hardware. The SDN-based approaches are useful to support the new technology in a uniﬁed manner, due to the separation in the control and data planes.
B. Existing SDN-based Edge Networking Schemes
Recently, researchers proposed several SDN-based schemes for efﬁcient data collection and network ﬂow monitoring in the context of edge networking, which can be applied for IoT applications. We discuss the existing schemes in three different aspects — data aggregation, network monitoring, and information collection in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) [34].
1) Data Aggregation: Das and Sahni [40] studied the conﬁgurations of network topology for data aggregation. They analyzed the limitations and complexity of a single aggregator network optimization (SANTO) approach. Further, the network trafﬁc optimization using SANTO (SANTO-NT) is studied. They showed that the optimization problem of data aggregation is NP hard, even in the presence of single aggregator in the network. Consequently, they proposed an SDN-based data aggregation scheme, in which a longest processing time (LPT)based approximation algorithm is used to solve the problem. The proposed scheme is divided into two optimization problems. Firstly, an optimization problem is formulated through which the nodes form different tree topology to minimize the aggregation time. Secondly, the constructed tree topology is optimized, for which the total network trafﬁc is minimized. Therefore, they used a combined approach for data aggregation and network trafﬁc optimization. It is observed that the proposed scheme can be applied in an IoT network consisting of several sensors/actuators to minimize the data aggregation time and network trafﬁc optimization.
In OpenFlow-based ﬂow-rule placement, the SDN controller controls the entire network, while leveraging the global view of the latter. Consequently, the network ﬂows can be monitored and analyzed for taking improved decisions. However, perﬂow analysis increases the complexity and control overhead in the network. In this respect, Huang et al. [41] proposed an admission control mechanism with ﬂow aggregation in SDN. Network calculus is used to optimize the admission control, while checking the available buffer space and bandwidth in the network. Therefore, the proposed scheme ensures that the performance of the ﬂows, which are already admitted, does not get affected due to the admission of a new ﬂow in the network. Additionally, the proposed scheme also consumes less amount of buffer space through the admission control and data aggregation. This feature would help seamless aggregation of trafﬁc from billions of devices.
As discussed in Section III-A, an IoT network comprises of heterogeneous devices. Therefore, the control and communication technologies vary from device to device. Due to the separation of the control plane from the physical devices using the concept of SDN, it is possible to control the devices in a

uniform manner. Consequently, device virtualization plays an important role to provide a uniﬁed control mechanisms for all devices present in an IoT network. Patouni et al. [22] proposed SDN-based virtualization techniques for sensors management. In the proposed scheme, integration of wireless services, cell management, and sensor management are discussed, while utilizing the beneﬁts of SDN. The authors showed that using SDN-based technologies, virtualization of network services can be done for improved network services over the traditional disruptive networking paradigms.
Malboubi et al. [42] proposed an SDN-based trafﬁc aggregation and measurement paradigm for optimal data aggregation. Two optimization problems are formulated — the aggregation of trafﬁc ﬂows and de-aggregation of the most important ﬂows from the aggregated ones. Ternary content addressable memory (TCAM) is used for both the aggregation and the de-aggregation processes. In such an approach, the TCAM is divided into two parts – one for aggregation of ﬂows and the other for de-aggregation of the important ﬂows. Consequently, the important ﬂows are analyzed to effectively analyze the network behavior through multi-armed bandit (MAB)-based optimization approach. Thus, the overhead in analyzing perﬂow statistics is minimized. It is observed that the proposed scheme is capable of measuring network behavior through the aggregation and de-aggregation techniques.
Consequently, it is evident that the SDN-based solution approaches are useful to aggregate the data coming from heterogeneous devices in an IoT environment, while optimizing the trafﬁc ﬂow in the network.
2) Network Monitoring: SDN is capable of providing a global view of the network to its operators. Therefore, in contrast to the traditional network ﬂow monitoring schemes (such as NetFlow [43] and sFlow [44]), global network can be monitored efﬁciently with SDN, while installing a suitable monitoring module. The network monitoring in SDN can be done in two ways — probing by the controller and reporting from switches while there is a change in the network behavior. In the former, the controller sends probe messages to the switches to get network statistics. This is typically done in a periodic manner. Consequently, network probing increases OPEX cost and network control overhead. On the other hand, in the latter approach, the switches send network statistics while there is a change in the network. Although such method poses less control overhead, accuracy of network behavior measurements is compromised, i.e., per-ﬂow statistics are not available to the controller. Therefore, there exists a trade-off between the control overhead and the accuracy. In this respect, Su et al. [45] proposed a ﬂow monitoring scheme to minimize communication cost in the network. In their work, a heuristicbased optimization approach is used to aggregate polling requests from devices and responses, in order to optimize the communication cost, while enabling the tracking of the global view of the network. Similarly, Liu et al. [46] proposed a ﬂow-update mechanism in the network, while considering available bandwidth and ﬂow-table capacity constraints. In such a scheme, Heuristic optimization is used to update the ﬂow-table rules in an effective and efﬁcient manner.
Sundor et al. [47] analyzed end-to-end transmission perfor-

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
5

mance in an IoT network in the presence of communication anomalies. The authors proposed a hybrid network infrastructure (i.e., combination of SDN and non-SDN) to improve the network performance. Therefore, based on the requirements and network statistics, SDN and non-SDN-based control mechanisms are deployed. Boussard et al. [48] proposed softwaredeﬁned LAN-based interconnection mechanism for heterogeneous devices present in the network, while manipulating control logic of the devices. Therefore, the devices in the network are interconnected and established a smart environment. The authors presented two types of controller architecture — network controller and virtual object controller. Network controller corresponds to the traditional SDN controller. On the other hand, the virtual object controller is the extension of network controllers, which can be controlled by the latter one.
3) SDN-Based Information Collection in WSN: A softwaredeﬁned WSN architecture is proposed by Jayashree et al. [49] to minimize the energy consumption of sensor nodes. The authors assumed that the cluster-head nodes can act as switches, and they can interact with a centralized controller situated at the base-station. Therefore, the sensor nodes can be programmed dynamically in real-time depending on the requirements. Moreover, the cluster nodes can also be selected dynamically, and associated ﬂow-rules can be deployed at the cluster head nodes. However, the resource-constrained nature of the sensor nodes should be taken into consideration, while controlling the network in a centralized manner. Similarly, Zeng et al. [50] proposed software-deﬁned sensor networks for energy consumption minimization, in which the sensor nodes are enabled with multi-tasking facility. The authors formed the energy consumption minimization problem as a mixed integer quadratic constraints programming (MIQP). Further, the formed MIQP is formulated as mixed integer linear programming to solve the problem with low computation complexity, while linearizing the optimization problem. Subsequently, the authors showed that using the proposed scheme, the sensing task of the nodes can be switched from one to another efﬁciently, depending on the application-speciﬁc requirements. Luo et al. [51] proposed an software-deﬁned WSN platform and addressed different technical challenges involved in it. Two-types of forwarding table format are presented — nodebased and value-based. In node-based forwarding, sensed information from the nodes is compared with their node-IDs in order to forward the further down-stream. For example, a node A is allowed to forward the data from node B, however, it is not allowed to forward the data of node C. On the other hand, the value of sensed information is compared in the value-based forwarding scheme. For example, when the temperature is above 40 degree Celsius, a node forwards the data. Otherwise, it drops the data coming from other nodes.
We summarize in Table I the existing SDN-based data aggregation schemes which are suitable for IoT applications.
IV. SDN-BASED ACCESS NETWORKING IN IOT
In this Section, we present different challenges and requirements of IoT applications and the existing solution approaches from the perspective of access networking.

A. Requirements at Access Network
1) Access-Core Network Layer Integration: The integration of two network layers (corresponding to two different devices heterogeneous in nature), so that they can communicate with each other in an efﬁcient manner, thereby improving the scalability and ﬂexibility of the network [55]. Additionally, to meet the requirements of the digital world, existing technologies are required to be replaced with newer technologies [51]. It is evident that newer technologies would be expensive, while replacing the existing ones. Consequently, we need novel inter-operability mechanisms which can balance the replacement of existing technologies to a large extent, i.e., existing technologies can be used with minor modiﬁcation/integration. Therefore, the integration of network layers among multiple devices is required to ensure, so that the access devices can exchange the ﬂow-table information with the devices present in core network.
2) Dynamic Resource Allocation: Dynamic resource allocation is an important factor to ensure load balancing of the network trafﬁc. Therefore, the network must be programmable to support application-speciﬁc requirements of IoT. For example, delay-sensitive ﬂows must be forwarded through the shortest path. Whereas loss-sensitive ﬂows must be forwarded through reliable path, i.e., the path may be the longest one with minimum loss. However, the existing networking technologies do not support such dynamic requirements of IoT through which control logic can be reconﬁgured [56]. As a result, available resources may be under-utilized due to the lack of dynamic rule-placement facility.
3) Distributed Architecture: The network architecture must be simple to minimize the complexity, so that multiple vendors can participate in a single platform to provide services. Therefore, a simpliﬁed architecture would enable platform independent networking among multiple devices [57]. The concept of Web of things (WoT) [58] addresses the heterogeneity issues by allowing multiple devices to communicate with one another, based on open-protocols such as HTTP and REST. However, the existing solutions do not support scalability and security aspects of IoT [56], [59]. Speciﬁcally, it does not support the distributed pub-sub architecture which is a key requirement of IoT.
In the subsequent Section, we discuss the existing SDNbased access networking technologies, which have the potential to address different issues and challenges mentioned above in the context of IoT applications.
B. SDN-based Access Networking in IoT
To address the above mentioned requirements, researchers proposed several schemes in the past decade. We discuss the existing schemes which are beneﬁcial to address different problems and challenges present in access networking.
1) Access-Core Integration by Simplifying Network Architecture: Due to the growing interests of machine-to-machine (M2M) communications and massive connectivity of IoT devices, it is expected that the access network will experience a major strain in near future. Integration of heterogeneous access networks into a single platform facilitates seamless

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
6

TABLE I: SUMMARY OF SDN-BASED EDGE NETWORKING SCHEMES

Application
Data aggregation (as in [40])
FlowCover (as in [45])

SDN-Based Applications Two optimization problems are formulated — a) construction of tree topology with single aggregator for minimizing data aggregation time; b) Minimization of total network trafﬁc of constructed topologies in ﬁrst step. Flow monitoring scheme is proposed using heuristic optimization to minimize communication cost, while leveraging global view of network topology and active network ﬂows.

Flow-update (as in [46])
Admission control with ﬂow aggregation (as in [41]) SDN-based WSN (as in [49]– [51])

• Flow-update mechanism is proposed, while considering link bandwidth and ﬂow-table capacity constraints. • Heuristic optimization is used to update the rules in an efﬁcient and effective manner. Admission control with ﬂow aggregation is proposed to determine required bandwidth and buffer space for maintaining QoS using network calculus.
Software-deﬁned WSN is proposed for efﬁcient data aggregation, task scheduling and energy consumption minimization of sensor nodes.

Distributed SDN-based optical network architecture is pro-

Aggregation posed for efﬁcient distributed data aggregation.

(as in [52])

Intelligent

Proposed data aggregation scheme is divided

trafﬁc

into two parts — optimal aggregation of incom-

(de)aggregation ing ﬂows and de-aggregation of most informa-

(as in [42]) tive ﬂows.

Softwaredeﬁned aggregation networks (as in [53]) PayLess (as in [54])
Softwaredeﬁned LANs (as in [48])

Dynamic bandwidth optimization algorithm is proposed in software-deﬁned aggregation networks for efﬁcient resource utilization.
• Application monitoring framework is proposed which provides ﬂexible data aggregation at different levels. • RESTfull-APIs are proposed to monitor different applications, such as intrusion detection, link-usage monitoring, user billing, and differentiated QoS management. Proposed SDN-based LAN architecture for interconnecting heterogeneous devices in order to establish a smart environment.

Future Research Directions • Use of multiple aggregators can be studied instead of single aggregator, where the data can be aggregated in a hierarchical manner. • The proposed scheme is an NP-hard problem. Therefore, heuristic optimization approaches can be applied. • The proposed scheme can be extended to use in multi-tenant scenarios where multiple parties are expected to participate. • In addition to the communication cost, network trafﬁc load and latency can be optimized. • Devices’ mobility can be considered with link bandwidth and ﬂow-table capacity to update the ﬂow-table rules.
• Prioritized ﬂow-scheduling can be implemented, so that the ﬂows with higher priorities are admitted ﬁrst. • Dynamic VM integration depending on the density of ﬂows.
• Network connectivity and communication overhead can be analyzed in addition with the energy consumption minimization of sensor nodes. • Preserving privacy of sensor nodes and sensed information is also a crucial factor which needs to be ensured. • Novel rule caching mechanism is required as the sensor nodes are resource constraint in nature. • Global view of the network can be enabled with SDN and open networking models to optimize the performance further. • Optimal use of TCAM can be incorporated with the proposed scheme, as it is highly cost-expensive. • Additionally, TCAM is also energy-expensive. Therefore, energy consumption of the switches can be optimized, while using the TCAM frequently. • The proposed scheme can be extended for multi-user scenario, and the performance of the proposed scheme can be studied in terms of trafﬁc scheduling, network delay and resource utilization.
• Supporting application-speciﬁc requirements of IoT on top of the proposed PayLess architecture. • Autonomous QoS management policy can be incorporated on top of the proposed scheme.
Security and privacy issues are important concerns, while allowing heterogeneous devices to be interconnected in a single platform.

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
7

data exchange among multiple devices. In this aspect, Orphanoudakis et al. [52] proposed a hybrid long-range optical access network architecture to minimize operating cost and energy consumption. In such a scheme, an active remote node (ARN) is introduced as the interface between the end-users and the backhaul network. Therefore, the ARN is responsible for short range communication, mainly wireless, and the long range passive optical networks (PON) work in the backhaul network to provide log-range connectivity. Such architecture can provide improved network virtualization and efﬁcient resource management, while enabled with SDN. The proposed scheme also integrates the access network with core network for efﬁcient data exchange with one another. Surligas et al. [60] discussed a heterogeneous wireless networking architecture with software-deﬁned radio (SDR). Using the SDR-based system, desired frequency can be achieved in real-time to enable communication between two heterogeneous devices. Consequently, the heterogeneous devices present in an IoT network can be connected together without having complex architecture and multiple transceivers. The authors developed a prototype with two different wireless technology – IEEE 802.11 and IEEE 802.15.4 – to show the effectiveness of the proposed scheme. It is evident that the SDR-based access technology will play an important role to connect heterogeneous devices into a single platform. Similarly, Riera et al. [61] introduced an ARN between central network and end-user premises in order to deal with wired-wireless convergence issues in an IoT environment. The ARN acts as an intermediate device between ﬁxed backbone networks and wireless networks. Consequently, the ARN also deals with associated bandwidth issues between two different networks.
Due to the advent of SDN, it is expected that the traditional network devices will be replaced by SDN-enabled devices. Consequently, service providers will experience a huge increase in the CAPEX cost. In contrast to the replacement of the traditional network devices, can we have some policy through which the former can be used along with new devices enabled with SDN? To address such issue, Clegg et al. [62] proposed an SDN-based network architecture, which is capable of enabling different access technologies with minimal changes in the network. Thus, enabling new networking technologies in the existing networking devices is done, while minimizing the associated cost in the process. The proposed scheme is tested on a Gigabit Ethernet Passive Optical Network (GEPON), and it is evident that OpenFlow functionality can be integrated on the existing devices through their management planes.
Kerpez et al. [63] proposed a software-deﬁned access network (SDAN) architecture, which captures the beneﬁts of SDN and NFV technologies. The proposed scheme provides a common interface to different controllers owned by multiple operators. It supports multi-commodity architecture for access networking, where multiple vendors can operate in a single platform. The authors presented different applications of the proposed SDAN architecture such as dynamic bandwidth allocation, service differentiation, network monitoring, and dynamic spectrum management. In another study, Dai et al. [64] proposed a software-deﬁned multiple access mechanism to support application-speciﬁc requirements of IoT, while

enabling run-time adaptive conﬁguration of available access schemes. Non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) technology is introduced to interact multiple devices in the network. In contrast to the traditional multiple access technologies, NOMA is capable of allocating resources to more number of users through non-orthogonal allocation strategy. The proposed scheme is useful to address different challenges present in IoT, as mentioned in Section IV-A.
A proxy-based control plane architecture is proposed by Kim et al. [65] for wireless networks. In the proposed scheme, two types of controllers are designed — proxy-based SDN controller (PSC) and main SDN controller (MSC). Firstly, PSC provides a control plane for access points (APs) deployed in wireless networks, while replacing some of the responsibilities of MSC. Secondly, the PSCs are controlled by MSCs whenever there is a change in the topology, as mobility is one of the important issues in wireless networks. Thus, the even-driven nature of wireless networks is supported with the proposed scheme, while improving the scalability and reliability of the network.
Software-deﬁned radio resource management in cellular networks is proposed by Vassilakis et al. [66]. The authors considered different concepts such as network declassiﬁcation, heterogeneity, and differentiation of control plane in cellular networks. Using the proposed scheme, macro base stations (BS) are capable of allocating adequate resources to smallscale BSs, in order to improve efﬁciency and QoS during hand-offs, while considering the mobility of users/vehicles in the network. Beside the resource management, mobility management is an important issue in IoT network, as most of the devices are mobile in nature. Due to the mobility of endusers, it is expected that the users will connect to multiple access networks. In this aspect, Wu et al. [67] proposed a mobility management framework in the software-deﬁned IoT architecture, while considering ubiquitous ﬂow control in multi-networks. Multiple controllers are placed according to geographical areas of the access points. Accordingly, ﬂowrules are placed at the access points by their respective controllers. Additionally, best match between the controllers and the access points are also analyzed.
2) Pub-Sub-Based Architecture: Publish-subscribe (pubsub) architecture provides greater scalability in a dynamic network topology. In such an architecture, message senders publish messages without having details knowledge of the receivers, known as subscribers. On the other hand, the subscribers also express their interests in receiving different messages without knowing about the publishers in detail. This is an important aspects of IoT applications, in which multiple devices are expected to act together without knowing about one another in detail. Hakiri et al. [56] proposed a publishsubscribe SDN architecture to enable scalable and efﬁcient IoT communications, while integrating data distribution services (DDSs). Different access networking devices, such as smart objects and gateways, publish/subscribe data through a DDS middleware. The proposed publish-subscribe abstraction layer is independent of speciﬁc networking protocol and technology. Therefore, application-speciﬁc protocols can be deployed in the network dynamically, thereby improving QoS in the

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
8

network. The authors discussed different issues in IoT, such as standardization, inter-operability, mobility, scalability, and network management, which can be addressed using the proposed scheme.
3) SDN-based Optical Access Networks: Chitimalla et al. [68] proposed a feedback-based software-deﬁned optical network architecture, in which users provide application-speciﬁc feedback to network service providers. According to the feedback received from users, adequate decisions are made in order to improve QoS of the network. The proposed scheme also ensures improved service delivery models with improved client-service-level differentiation. Similarly, Wang et al. [69] proposed a SDN architecture to control optical access networks, while enabling the global view of the network. In such a scheme, the SDN controller collects network statistics based on per-ﬂow analysis. Accordingly, the controller explores optimum path for data forwarding, while considering the required QoS to the users. The authors evaluated the proposed scheme in GPON networks, and showed that such approach is useful to minimize energy consumption in the network.
4) Flow-based Information Accessing: Matias et al. [70] proposed a per-ﬂow-based access control mechanism, which allocates the resources depending on the service requests from users. Therefore, depending on the ﬂows at the dataplane, adequate services can be authorized simultaneously to users. Additionally, secure access control mechanism is also ensured, as per-ﬂow-based services are delivered. Therefore, trafﬁc load in the network is minimized, as ﬂows are mapped with the respective service delivery models, while avoiding collision and mis-identiﬁcation. Bull et al. [71] proposed a preemptive ﬂow installation mechanism in IoT using SDN. The proposed scheme dynamically learns the applicationspeciﬁc requirements, and deploys the required trafﬁc rules for improving efﬁciency of the network. Therefore, the devices adapt the required changes in trafﬁc rules prior to the actual packet arrival from devices. As the scheme places the ﬂowrules at the switches in a proactive manner, packet delivery delay can be minimized signiﬁcantly.
5) Rule-Caching in Mobile Access Networks: The devices are stationary in nature in the existing solution approaches discussed so far. However, in case of mobile access networks, we need to have adequate rule-caching mechanism to orchestrate optimal performance. Dong et al. [72] proposed a novel rule-caching mechanism for software-deﬁned mobile access networks. Two-layer rule space structure is designed in the proposed scheme — memory manager and cache manager. The memory manager is inserted in the SDN device and is responsible for storing the rules. On the contrary, the cache manager caches the rules deﬁned by the centralized controller and updates the rules before they are stored by the memory manager. Therefore, an efﬁcient rule-caching mechanism is established using the proposed software-deﬁned mobile access networks, in order to improve energy consumption proﬁle of the mobile nodes. Similarly, Li et al. [73] formulated an optimization problem for optimal rule placement at the switches, while considering the network dynamics in the presence of mobile devices. Due to the presence of mobile devices, network behavior changes frequently, which, in turn, requires

frequent rule modiﬁcation/placement at the switches. However, optimum rule placement in a highly dynamic network is an NP-hard problem. Therefore, heuristic optimization [74] is used to place ﬂow-rules at the SDN switches to deal with the dynamic behavior of the network.
We summarize the existing SDN-based access networking technologies in Table II, while offering insights into future research directions.
V. SDN-BASED CORE NETWORKING IN IOT
The Section provides a brief overview of different challenges and requirements involved in core networking of IoT applications. Further, we present a comparative analysis of the existing SDN-based core networking technologies in a tabular format.
A. Requirements at Core Network
1) Adequate Security Mechanism at Core Network: The security of enterprise network is an important concern. There exists two well-established solution approaches — distributed host-based and centralized security using network intrusion detection system (NIDS) at the core network. However, the existing solution approaches fail in different respects. The NIDS-based schemes require additional infrastructure [77] due to high aggregate data-rates. Additionally, the network operators have very limited global-view of the network. On the other hand, the host-based solution approaches are OS-speciﬁc and may lead to solutions converging merely to local optima. Therefore, we need to have adequate security mechanisms at the core network in order to block different malicious activities.
2) Issues with Traditional Classiﬁcation Approaches: These approaches suffer from searching a particular action taken at a single networking device, as global view of the network is not supported with the traditional networking technologies. Therefore, we need an adequate classiﬁcation mechanism for efﬁcient searching in the network.
3) Adequate Network Trafﬁc Distribution: Due to the presence of heterogeneous devices in IoT, as discussed in Section III, it is evident that different application-speciﬁc routing requests should be handled efﬁciently, while fulﬁlling users’ requirements. Application-speciﬁc requests should be redirected as per the requests received within the intermediate nodes, while minimizing the associated cost, network load, and delay.
We limit our discussion on the core technologies present from the aspects of SDIoT. We believe that the existing technologies are useful to meet the requirements of IoT core networks. Additionally, there are existing survey papers which focused on the core network technologies [1], [3]. In Table III, we summarize the existing SDN-based core networking schemes, which are suitable to address the challenges mentioned above, with some future research directions.
VI. SDN-BASED DATA CENTER NETWORKING
In this Section, we present the challenges and requirements for efﬁcient data center networking from the perspective of

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
9

TABLE II: SUMMARY OF SDN-BASED ACCESS NETWORKING IN IOT

Application Network accesscore integration (as in [52])
Accessing information (as in [62])
Simplifying access network (as in [63], [75])
Scalable IoT communications (as in [56], [76])
Ethernet optical access network (as in [68], [69])
Wireless access networking (as in [65])
Mobile access network (as in [66])
Flow-based network access control (as in [70]) Dynamic ﬂow installation (as in [71])
Rule-caching in mobile access network (as in [72], [73])

SDN-Based Applications Proposed SDN-based optical network architecture for network processing and information routing, while integrating access and core networks together. Proposed a scheme which enables OpenFlow at access networking devices with minimal changes. It would help the network operator to monitor/control the access devices efﬁciently. • Proposed next-generation software-deﬁned access network to simply the access network to make it simple, agile, and elastic. • Access network control and management are virtualized. • It can be used in multi-operator environment appropriately. Publish-subscribe architecture is proposed, while integrating SDN and IoT together, which enables scalable IoT communications and also brings ﬂexibility to the network. • A SDN-based Ethernet optical access network is proposed to enable applicationspeciﬁc feedback system from customers for better service delivery. • Energy-efﬁcient optical access network is proposed. • A proxy-based software-deﬁned wireless access networking scheme is proposed for wireless access points. • The proposed scheme can adaptively change strategies in different situations — network partitions and control bottlenecks.
SDN-based radio resource management scheme is proposed to allocate resources to small-scale base stations to ensure better QoS during hand-offs. SDN-based per-ﬂow network access control mechanism is proposed to support application-speciﬁc requirements.
• Dynamic ﬂow installation technique is proposed. • Devices adapt adequate trafﬁc rules before actual packet arrival, and thus, improves efﬁciency of the network. • SDN-based rule caching mechanism is proposed in mobile access network, while considering nodes’ mobility in the network. • Heuristic optimization approach is used with low-complexity to minimize the overhead involved in rule-placement.

Future Research Directions • Dynamic resource allocation through programmable networks, while integrating access and core networks to improve ﬂexibility and scalability of the network. • In the proposed scheme, some of the devices may not be enabled with OpenFlow. Therefore, studying different interfacing mechanisms among devices in the semi-OpenFlow-enabled network, so that the devices can communicate with one another efﬁciently. • The proposed scheme can be extended further to cope up with the growing development of access networks. • Different pricing and billing policies can be proposed for vendor-speciﬁc services, as multiple vendors provide services in a single platform.
• Energy-efﬁciency and resource management are important aspects in IoT which need to be addressed, while introducing a middleware in the network architecture. • In the proposed scheme, downstream network ﬂow management is considered. However, in IoT applications, upstream network ﬂow management is also a research challenge. Therefore, novel upstream network ﬂow management scheme can be proposed in addition to the downstream ﬂow. • In the propose scheme, it is assumed that a PSC is controlled by only one MSC. Therefore, the masterslave architecture can be studied in the presence of multiple MSCs. • Mobility-aware application-speciﬁc service differentiation can be studied using the concept of network function virtualization (NFV). • In the proposed scheme, an approximation-based method is used. Network calculus can be used to capture the randomness of the proposed scheme.
• Adequate ﬂow-scheduling scheme needs to be implemented so that none of the ﬂows are stalled in the network. Additionally, network delay can also be minimized. • As mentioned by the authors, the adaptation of trafﬁc rules can be studied in the presence of heterogeneous networks.
• Efﬁcient hand-off mechanism needs to be studied to improve the QoS, while the users move from one BS to another BS. • Energy-efﬁciency is another important aspect which needs to be considered, while replacing the forwarding rules dynamically.

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
10

TABLE III: SUMMARY OF SDN-BASED CORE NETWORKING IN IOT

Application Securing enterprise network (as in [78])
Information-centric networking (as in [79]–[81])
Packet classiﬁcation (as in [82])
Device-to-device communication in LTE networks (as in [85]) Routing in mobile core networks (as in [86], [87])

SDN-Based Scheme • SDN-based hybrid security framework is proposed for enterprise networks. • It is the combination of host-based and network-intrusion detection systems to capture beneﬁts of the both. Content-centric networking scheme is proposed in semi-SDN-enabled network, which enhances load-balancing and trafﬁc-monitoring in the network.
Global packet classiﬁcation method is proposed to analyze packet behavior in the SDN-enabled network.
Proposed device-to-device communication method in SDN-enabled LTE networks to improve QoE of users.
• A routing protocol is proposed for software-deﬁned mobile core networks. • Resource redirection and ﬂow routing are jointly optimized for efﬁcient service delivery.

Future Research Directions • Network throughput is minimized due to the extra load on the network. Therefore, the proposed scheme can be extended further in which network throughput remains unchanged.
• Implementation of node-centric and contentcentric networking scheme can be proposed to meet application-speciﬁc requirements, while minimizing delay and cost involved in the process. • As mentioned by the authors, compressed selfindexes [83] and Boolean expression minimization [84] can be applied to optimize the packet classiﬁcation method further. • Different security aspects need to be considered, while allowing devices to communicate with one another.
• Dynamic load balancing scheme can be proposed depending on the application-speciﬁc requirements. • Minimization of network delay and operation cost can also be minimized.

IoT application requirements, while presenting a comparative analysis of the existing SDN-based data center networking schemes in a tabular format.
A. Requirements at Data Center Network
1) Efﬁcient Flow Handling: Typically, there are two types of ﬂows in a network — long-lived ﬂows and short-lived ﬂows. The long-lived and the short-lived ﬂows are known as elephant- and mice-ﬂows, respectively. Therefore, it is necessary to handle both ﬂows efﬁciently without disrupting one another. However, existing trafﬁc engineering approaches can cause congestion to the short-lived ﬂows if they are not handled in an efﬁcient manner [88].
2) Trafﬁc-aware VM Deployments: Virtual machines (VM) play an important role in data center networks to serve users’ requests. The VMs are hosted by different data centers to serve the requests. We discussed in Section V-A that applicationspeciﬁc requests should be distributed in an efﬁcient manner within intermediate nodes to minimize the associated cost and network load. Eventually, the requests are fetched to VMs, and the VMs execute the requests and reply back to the users. Therefore, the VMs must be deployed dynamically in such a way that they are adequate to serve the requests, while minimizing the associated cost.
3) Energy-efﬁcient Data Center Networking: Data centers are one of the most power-hungry consumers [33], in which most of the power consumption is due to the lack of efﬁcient mechanisms and under-utilization of resources. Therefore, the minimization of energy consumption at data centers is a key factor to promote the concept of green technology. Conse-

quently, adequate techniques need to be proposed for energyefﬁcient data center networking.
4) Over- and Under-subscription of Services: Another important issue is over- and under-subscription of services. Typically, customers prefer to subscribe more resources in advance to meet real-time requirements, as real-time resource subscription is more costly [89]. Therefore, some of the data center may be over- and under-utilized due to the more and less number of requests, respectively, in real-time from customers. Consequently, a dynamic request mapping technique is required to distribute the requests among data centers.
5) Seamless Mobility of VMs: Typically, VMs are hosted by particular data centers, and they cannot be migrated from one data center to another without disrupting the ongoing services. However, providing seamless connectivity is a key aspect of IoT, which needs to be assured, while serving requests by creating VMs. Therefore, seamless mobility of VMs across data centers is required for improving QoS in the data center networks.
We also limit our discussion on the data center technologies present from the aspects of SDIoT. We believe that the existing technologies from the aspects of data center networking are useful to meet the requirements of IoT. Additionally, there are existing papers which focused on the data center network technologies [1], [3]. We summarize the existing SDN-based data center networking schemes in the context of IoT applications in Table IV.
VII. OPEN RESEARCH ISSUES
As discussed in Sections I – VI, there would be massive connectivity issues among multiple devices present in IoT.

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
11

TABLE IV: SUMMARY OF SDN-BASED DATA CENTER NETWORKING IN IOT

Application Trafﬁc engineering in data center (as in [88], [90]– [92])
Online resource sharing (as in [93])
Energy-efﬁcient networking (as in [94], [95])
Virtual network service (as in [89], [96])
Routing at data center (as in [97])
VM-migration (as in [98])
Network virtualization (as in [99])
SDN-based IoT cloud (as in [100], [101])
SDN-based federated multicloud framework (as in [102], [103]) Cloud-based SDWNs (as in [104])

SDN-Based Applications • Proposed an SDN-based trafﬁc engineering scheme to improve scalability and load balancing at data center. • Trafﬁc-aware VM deployment and inter-data center communication technology are studied to serve users’ requests in an efﬁcient manner. • Proposed software-deﬁned data center networking to share resources to make it available online to authorized users. • Simulated annealing heuristic is used to schedule the resources available online based on user requirements. SDN-based routing scheme is proposed at data center network to minimize energy consumed by network ﬂow-scheduling.
• Dynamic virtual networks are created across multiple data centers for efﬁcient network operations. • It enables load balancing at data center, while re-conﬁguring mapping of virtual links.
• SDN-based system is presented to enable multicast routing in data center. • The proposed multicasting scheme is capable of minimizing the size of routing tree for any given topology. • Seamless VM-mobility through multiple data centers is proposed, while leveraging softwaredeﬁned networking concept. • The proposed scheme is location independent and thereby, VM migration can be handled efﬁciently without disrupting ongoing services.
• Network function is virtualized dynamically depending on trafﬁc ﬂows and application-speciﬁc requirements.
• Proposed an SDN-based IoT cloud framework to manage IoT infrastructures in a uniﬁed manner. • Application-speciﬁc run-time customization can be supported, while separating the control logic from hardware devices. • Resource provisioning at federated cloud environment is studied. • The proposed framework is useful to manage and schedule resources dynamically to meet application-speciﬁc requirements. • Game-theoretic cooperative and competitive resource management scheme is proposed. • Using SDN facilities, cloud service providers distribute resources among themselves.

Future Research Directions • Prioritized ﬂow-scheduling scheme can be proposed to schedule the ﬂows, while considering the time-to-live (TTL) of the ﬂows. • Efﬁcient VM migration and inter VM communication scheme can be proposed to meet the application-speciﬁc requirements dynamically. • VM migration and inter VM communication methods can be proposed to meet real-time application-speciﬁc requirements. • Security concerns should be incorporated, while sharing contents online.
• In the proposed schemes, lower ﬂow-sizes get higher priority compared to higher ﬂow-sizes. Therefore, higher ﬂow-sizes may not be served within their deadline if there is very large number of lower ﬂow-sizes. • As mentioned by the authors, virtual network service migration can be considered, while migrating virtual links. • In mobile environment, novel migration technique is required for providing uninterrupted network services. • Cooperative game-theoretic concepts can be used for such group-based communications, where data centers can form the groups based on their utility values.
• Dynamic mapping of virtual links must be ensured, while migrating the virtual machines from one data center to another. • The available link capacity may not be adequate although a data center is capable of hosting the newly migrated VMs. Therefore, efﬁcient VM migration technique needs to be proposed, while considering available link-capacity. • The proposed scheme can be extended for random network topology. • Migration of virtual network functions (VNF) can also be studied. • Improved resource utilization and run-time governance schemes need to be proposed. • Fine-grained policies must be ensured to deal with security and privacy issues, while allowing providing services from multi-tenant clouds. • Inter-cloud VM-migration can be studied. • Efﬁcient data transfer and trafﬁc engineering can also be studied in federated cloud environment.
The proposed scheme can be studied in a distributed manner for ad-hoc networks such as VANETs and MANETs.

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
12

To fulﬁll such massive requirements, researchers investing in designing solutions to ﬁnd out a clear road-map for SDN-based IoT networks. In this work, we presented the existing works which have the potential to address the challenges present in IoT edge, access, core, and data center networks from the perspective of SDN. We noted that there are several limitations in SDN-based solution approaches, while integrating them with the IoT network. Consequently, we discuss different open research issues from different aspects — mobility, policy enforcement, hardware platform, and practical deployments — based on the detailed synthesis of existing solution approaches, as discussed in Sections III – VI.

D. From Theoretcial Aspects to Practical Deployments
Many solution approaches are proposed in the literature, as discussed in Sections III – IV from theoretical aspects. However, there is a research lacuna between theoretical aspects and practical deployments. Different issues such as deployment policies, issues with multiple vendor-speciﬁc services, and integration of multiple devices require well-investigation before the actual deployment of the proposed schemes. Therefore, different open challenging issues such as clear market policy and how the existing devices can be supported with the new technologies need to be addressed before going for the actual deployment.

A. Issues with Mobility
Typically, an IoT environment consists of heterogeneous devices, which are both static and mobile in nature. Moreover, mobility pattern of one device may be different from others. Therefore, the network operators also need to incorporate the mobility issues, while updating forwarding rules at the devices. However, research on updating forwarding rules in the presence of mobile devices is absent in most of the existing SDNbased solution approaches. Additionally, billions of devices are expected to be connected through the power of IoT. Therefore, handling requests from billions of devices in an efﬁcient and reliable manner is a challenging issue, while dynamically changing the forwarding rules in real-time with consideration of devices’ mobility. Consequently, several issues such as optimal rule-placement, trafﬁc ﬂow optimization, controller placement problem, and dynamic resource allocation are need to be addressed, while considering both the static and mobile behavior of an IoT environment.
B. Adequate Policy Enforcement
Adequate policy enforcement in the entire network is a challenging issue, although a few solution approaches are proposed in the literature [105], [106]. It is expected that multiple SDN controllers can work together in a distributed manner. Therefore, SDN policy and speciﬁcation for each controller may be different, which, in turn, creates concurrency policy enforcement issues. Consequently, concurrent policy enforcement may result concurrency issues at the data plane of network switches. Therefore, adequate policy enforcement schemes need to be designed to deal with such issues.

VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we provided a detailed overview of existing SDN-based technologies in the context of IoT applications, in order to offer seamless, cost-effective and reliable service delivery to users. Different networking aspects of IoT are discussed — edge networking and access networking. We also identiﬁed some important technical issues and presented several future research directions to address those. Additionally, we presented some of the challenges and requirements of core and data center networking from the aspects of IoT network, while presenting a comparative analysis of the existing schemes. This survey reveals that the use of SDN-based solution approaches in IoT applications is potentially useful to fulﬁll the requirements in establishing an IoT environment, while considering the fact that there are several challenges to support the massive connections present in the network.
In case of edge networking, we discussed existing SDNbased approaches which are useful to address different challenges and requirements of wireless sensor network. On the other hand, in access networking, we discussed the existing SDN-based solution approaches that ensure efﬁcient edge networking in IoT such as data collection from sensors/actuators, data aggregation and de-aggregation, and admission control. On the issues of access networking, different access networking schemes are discussed, while leveraging the global-view of the network using SDN. Finally, we also presented an overview of the challenges presents in IoT core and data center networks, while highlighting different SDN-based approaches which are useful to address the challenges.
In sum, the integration of SDN schemes in IoT is envisioned to be useful for evolving scalable, energy-efﬁcient, and costeffective IoT architecture.

C. Independent Platform
Using SDN technology, in-built control logic can be pulled out from network devices, and it can be reconﬁgured according to requirements. As a result, current hardware devices need to be managed in an efﬁcient manner, so that they can be conﬁgured seamlessly without depending on vendor-speciﬁc hardware and protocols. However, it is difﬁcult to support the traditional networking devices with the existing SDN technologies. Therefore, we need to have SDN-based solution approaches, which support the traditional networking devices in an abstracted manner, while considering speciﬁc hardware related issues.

REFERENCES
[1] H. Farhady, H. Lee, and A. Nakao, “Software-Deﬁned Networking: A survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 81, pp. 79–95, Apr. 2015.
[2] B. Bing, Emerging Technologies in Wireless LANs: Theory, Design, and Deployment. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[3] D. Kreutz, F. Ramos, P. Esteves Verissimo, C. Esteve Rothenberg, S. Azodolmolky, and S. Uhlig, “Software-Deﬁned Networking: A Comprehensive Survey,” Proceeding of the IEEE, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 14–76, Jan. 2015.
[4] “Software-Deﬁned Networking: The New Norm for Networks,” Open Networking Foundation White Paper, April 2012.
[5] N. McKeown, T. Anderson, H. Balakrishnan, G. Parulkar, L. Peterson, J. Rexford, S. Shenker, and J. Turner, “OpenFlow: enabling innovation in campus networks,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 69–74, Apr. 2008.

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
13

[6] L. Hu, M. Qiu, J. Song, M. Hossain, and A. Ghoneim, “Software deﬁned healthcare networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 67–75, Dec. 2015.
[7] A. Samanta, S. Bera, and S. Misra, “Link-Quality-Aware Resource Allocation With Load Balance in Wireless Body Area Networks,” IEEE Systems Journal, 2015, DOI: 10.1109/JSYST.2015.2458586.
[8] J. Guerrero-Ibanez, S. Zeadally, and J. Contreras-Castillo, “Integration challenges of intelligent transportation systems with connected vehicle, cloud computing, and internet of things technologies,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 122–128, Dec. 2015.
[9] J. Pan, R. Jain, S. Paul, T. Vu, A. Saifullah, and M. Sha, “An Internet of Things Framework for Smart Energy in Buildings: Designs, Prototype, and Experiments,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 527–537, Dec. 2015.
[10] Y. Kim and Y. Lee, “Automatic Generation of Social Relationships between Internet of Things in Smart Home Using SDN-Based Home Cloud,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications Workshops (WAINA), Gwangiu, Mar. 2015, pp. 662–667.
[11] S. Bera, S. Misra, and J. J. Rodrigues, “Cloud Computing Applications for Smart Grid: A Survey,” IEEE Trans. on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 1477–1494, May 2015.
[12] N. A. Jagadeesan and B. Krishnamachari, “Software-Deﬁned Networking Paradigms in Wireless Networks: A Survey,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 27:1–11, 2015.
[13] K. Sood, S. Yu, and Y. Xiang, “Software Deﬁned Wireless Networking Opportunities and Challenges for Internet of Things: A Review,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2015, DOI: 10.1109/JIOT.2015.2480421.
[14] ngel Leonardo Valdivieso Caraguay, A. B. Peral, L. I. B. Lpez, and L. J. G. Villalba, “SDN: Evolution and Opportunities in the Development IoT Applications,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, p. 10, May 2014.
[15] J. Gubbi, R. Buyya, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, “Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements,and future directions,” Future Generation Computer Systems (Elsevier), vol. 29, pp. 1645– 1660, 2013.
[16] M. Amadeo, C. Campolo, J. Quevedo, D. Corujo, A. Molinaro, A. Iera, R. L. Aguiar, and A. V. Vasilakos, “Information-Centric Networking for the Internet of Things: Challenges and Opportunities,” IEEE Network Magazine (to appear), 2016.
[17] S. Sarkar, S. Chatterjee, and S. Misra, “Assessment of the Suitability of Fog Computing in the Context of Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans. on Cloud Computing, 2015, DOI: 10.1109/TCC.2015.2485206.
[18] Y.-S. Jeong, N. Chilamkurti, and L. J. G. Villalba, “Advanced Technologies and Communication Solutions for Internet of Things,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, p. 3, 2014.
[19] S. Bera, S. Misra, and M. S. Obaidat, “Mobility-Aware Flow-Table Implementation in Software-Deﬁned IoT,” in Proc. of the IEEE GLOBECOM, Dec. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[20] H. Kim and N. Feamster, “Improving network management with software deﬁned networking,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 114–119, 2013.
[21] N. Omnes, M. Bouillon, G. Fromentoux, and O. Le Grand, “A programmable and virtualized network & IT infrastructure for the internet of things: How can NFV & SDN help for facing the upcoming challenges,” in Proc. of International Conference on Intelligence in Next Generation Networks (ICIN), Paris, Feb. 2015, pp. 64–69.
[22] E. Patouni, A. Merentitis, P. Panagiotopoulos, A. Glentis, and N. Alonistioti, “Network Virtualisation Trends: Virtually Anything Is Possible by Connecting the Unconnected,” in Proc. of the IEEE Future Networks and Services (SDN4FNS), Trento, Nov. 2013, pp. 1–7.
[23] M. Yang, Y. Li, D. Jin, L. Zeng, X. Wu, and A. V. Vasilakos, “SoftwareDeﬁned and Virtualized Future Mobile and Wireless Networks: A Survey,” ACM/Springer Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 4–18, Feb. 2015.
[24] Z. Sheng, S. Yang, Y. Yu, A. Vasilakos, J. McCann, and K. Leung, “A survey on the ietf protocol suite for the internet of things: standards, challenges, and opportunities,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 91–98, Dec. 2013.
[25] J. Shuja, A. Gani, K. Bilal, A. U. R. Khan, S. A. Madani, S. U. Khan, and A. Y. Zomaya, “A Survey of Mobile Device Virtualization: Taxonomy and State of the Art,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 1:1–36, 2016.
[26] T. Wood, K. K. Ramakrishnan, J. Hwang, G. Liu, and W. Zhang, “Toward a software-based network: integrating software deﬁned networking and network function virtualization,” IEEE Network, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 36–41, 2015.

[27] D. Giusto, A. Iera, G. Morabito, and L. Atzori, Eds., The Internet of Things: 20th Tyrrhenian Workshop on Digital Communications. Springer, 2010.
[28] H. Yoon, S. Kim, T. Nam, and J. Kim, “Dynamic ﬂow steering for IoT monitoring data in SDN-coordinated IoT-Cloud services,” in Proc. of the International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN), Da Nang, Vietnam, Jan. 2017.
[29] S. M. A. Oteafy and H. S. Hassanein, “Towards a global IoT: Resource re-utilization in WSNs,” in Proc. of International Conf. on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), 2012, pp. 617–622.
[30] A. El-Mougy, M. Ibnkahla, and L. Hegazy, “Software-deﬁned wireless network architectures for the Internet-of-Things,” in Proc. of the IEEE LCN Workshop, Clearwater Beach, FL, Oct. 2015, pp. 804–811.
[31] C. C. Aggarwal, N. Ashish, and A. Sheth, The Internet of Things: A Survey from the Data-Centric Perspective. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2013, pp. 383–428.
[32] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A survey,” Computer Networks, 2010.
[33] M. Dayarathna, Y. Wen, and R. Fan, “Data Center Energy Consumption Modeling: A Survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 732–794, Jan. 2015.
[34] S. Bera, S. Misra, S. K. Roy, and M. S. Obaidat, “Soft-WSN: SoftwareDeﬁned WSN Management System for IoT Applications,” IEEE Systems Journal, 2016, DOI: 10.1109/JSYST.2016.2615761.
[35] Q. Jing, A. V. Vasilakos, J. Wan, J. Lu, and D. Qiu, “Security of the Internet of Things: perspectives and challenges,” Wireless Networks (Springer), vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 2481–2501, Jun. 2014.
[36] Z. Yan, P. Zhang, and A. V. Vasilakos, “A survey on trust management for Internet of Things,” Journal of Network and Computer Applications (Elsevier), vol. 42, pp. 120–134, Jun. 2014.
[37] R. Vilalta, R. Ciungu, A. Mayoral, R. Casellas, R. Martinez, D. Pubill, J. Serra, R. Munoz, and C. Verikoukis, “Improving Security in Internet of Things with Software Deﬁned Networking,” in Proc. of the IEEE GLOBECOM, Washington, DC, USA, Dec. 2016.
[38] M. Vogler, F. Li, M. Claebens, J. Schleicher, S. Sehic, S. Nastic, and S. Dustdar, “Colt collaborative delivery of lightweight iot applications,” in Internet of Things. User-Centric IoT, ser. Lecture Notes of the Institute for Computer Sciences, Social Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering, R. Giaffreda, R.-L. Vieriu, E. Pasher, G. Bendersky, A. J. Jara, J. J. Rodrigues, E. Dekel, and B. Mandler, Eds. Springer International Publishing, 2015, vol. 150, pp. 265–272.
[39] C. Lerche, K. Hartke, and M. Kovatsch, “Industry adoption of the Internet of Things: A constrained application protocol survey,” in Proc. of the IEEE Conf. on Emerging Technologies & Factory Automation (ETFA), Krakow, Sept. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[40] S. Das and S. Sahni, “Network Topology Optimization for Data Aggregation,” in Proc. of the IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGrid), Chicago, IL, May 2014, pp. 493–501.
[41] J. Huang, Y. He, Q. Duan, Q. Yang, and W. Wang, “Admission control with ﬂow aggregation for QoS provisioning in software-deﬁned network,” in Proc. of the IEEE GLOBECOM, Austin, TX, Dec. 2014, pp. 1182–1186.
[42] M. Malboubi, L. Wang, C.-N. Chuah, and P. Sharma, “Intelligent SDN based trafﬁc (de)Aggregation and Measurement Paradigm (iSTAMP),” in Proc. of the IEEE INFOCOM, Toronto, ON, Apr. 2014, pp. 934–942.
[43] R. Hofstede, P. Celeda, B. Trammell, I. Drago, R. Sadre, A. Sperotto, and A. Pras, “Flow Monitoring Explained: From Packet Capture to Data Analysis with NetFlow and IPFIX,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 2037 – 2064, 2014.
[44] M. Wang, B. Li, and Z. Li, “sFlow: towards resource-efﬁcient and agile service federation in service overlay networks,” in in Proc. of the International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 2004, pp. 628–635.
[45] Z. Su, T. Wang, Y. Xia, and M. Hamdi, “FlowCover: Low-cost ﬂow monitoring scheme in software deﬁned networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE GLOBECOM, Austin, TX, Dec. 2014, pp. 1956–1961.
[46] Y. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Wang, A. V. Vasilakos, and J. Yuan, “Achieving efﬁcient and fast update for multiple ﬂows in software-deﬁned networks,” in Proc. of the ACM SIGCOMM workshop on Distributed cloud computing, NY, 2014, pp. 77–82.
[47] H. Sandor, B. Genge, and G. Sebestyen-Pal, “Resilience in the Internet of Things: The Software Deﬁned Networking approach,” in Proc. of the IEEE Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Computer Communication and Processing (ICCP), Cluj-Napoca, Sept. 2015, pp. 545–552.
[48] M. Boussard, D. T. Bui, L. Ciavaglia, R. Douville, M. Le Pallec, N. Le Sauze, L. Noirie, S. Papillon, P. Peloso, and F. Santoro,

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of
Things Journal
14

“Software-Deﬁned LANs for Interconnected Smart Environment,” in Proc. of Intl. Teletrafﬁc Congress, Ghent, Sept. 2015, pp. 219–227. [49] P. Jayashree and F. Infant Princy, “Leveraging SDN to conserve energy in WSN-An analysis,” in Proc. of the International Conference on Signal Processing, Communication and Networking (ICSCN), Chennai, India, March 2015, pp. 1–6. [50] D. Zeng, P. Li, S. Guo, T. Miyazaki, J. Hu, and Y. Xiang, “Energy Minimization in Multi-Task Software-Deﬁned Sensor Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 64, no. 11, pp. 3128–3139, Nov. 2015. [51] T. Luo, H.-P. Tan, and T. Q. S. Quek, “Sensor OpenFlow: Enabling Software-Deﬁned Wireless Sensor Networks,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 16, no. 11, pp. 1896–1899, 2012. [52] T. Orphanoudakis, C. Matrakidis, and A. Stavdas, “Next generation optical network architecture featuring distributed aggregation, network processing and information routing,” in Proc. of the European Conference on Networks and Communications (EuCNC), Bologna, Jun. 2014, pp. 1–5. [53] J. Wu, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Zhou, and J. Sun, “Global dynamic bandwidth optimization for software deﬁned optical access and aggregation networks,” in Proc. of International Conference on Optical Communications and Networks (ICOCN), Suzhou, Nov. 2014, pp. 1–4. [54] S. Chowdhury, M. Bari, R. Ahmed, and R. Boutaba, “PayLess: A low cost network monitoring framework for Software Deﬁned Networks ,” in Proc. of the IEEE Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS), Krakow, May 2014, pp. 1–9. [55] Z. Qin, G. Denker, C. Giannelli, P. Bellavista, and N. Venkatasubramanian, “A Software Deﬁned Networking architecture for the Internet-ofThings,” in Proc. of the IEEE Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS), May, Krakow 2014, pp. 1–9. [56] A. Hakiri, P. Berthou, A. Gokhale, and S. Abdellatif, “Publish/subscribe-enabled software deﬁned networking for efﬁcient and scalable IoT communications,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 48–54, Sept. 2015. [57] Y. Jararweh, M. Al-Ayyoub, A. Darabseh, E. Benkhelifa, M. Vouk, and A. Rindos, “SDIoT: a software deﬁned based internet of things framework,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 453–461, Aug. 2015. [58] B. Christophe, M. Boussard, M. Lu, A. Pastor, and V. Toubiana, “The Web of Things Vision: Things as a Service and Interaction Patterns,” Bell Labs Technical Journal, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 55–61, Jun. 2011. [59] S. Chakrabarty, D. W. Engels, and S. Thathapudi, “Black SDN for the Internet of Things,” in Proc. of the IEEE Intl Conf. on Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), Dallas, TX, Oct. 2015, pp. 190–198. [60] M. Surligas, A. Makrogiannakis, and S. Papadakis, “Empowering the IoT Heterogeneous Wireless Networking with Software Deﬁned Radio,” in Proc. of the IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), Glasgow, May 2015, pp. 1–5. [61] J. Ferrer Riera, C. Bock, E. Escalona, M. Parker, S. Walker, T. Quinlan, V. Jungnickel, K. Habel, V. Marques, and D. Levi, “Software-deﬁned wired-wireless access network convergence: The SODALES approach,” in Proc. of the IEEE GLOBECOM Workshop, Austin, TX, Dec. 2014, pp. 1522–1527. [62] R. Clegg, J. Spencer, R. Landa, M. Thakur, J. Mitchell, and M. Rio, “Pushing Software Deﬁned Networking to the Access,” in Proc. of the European Workshop on Software Deﬁned Networks (EWSDN), Budapest, Sept. 2014, pp. 31–36. [63] K. Kerpez, J. Ciofﬁ, G. Ginis, M. Goldburg, S. Galli, and P. Silverman, “Software-deﬁned access networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 152–159, Sept. 2014. [64] L. Dai, B. Wang, Y. Yuan, S. Han, C.-L. I, and Z. Wang, “Nonorthogonal multiple access for 5G: solutions, challenges, opportunities, and future research trends,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 74–81, Sept. 2015. [65] W.-S. Kim, S.-H. Chung, and J. Shi, “WiPCon: A Proxied Control Plane for Wireless Access Points in Software Deﬁned Networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Computational Science and Engineering (CSE), Chengdu, Dec. 2014, pp. 923–929. [66] V. Vassilakis, I. D. Moscholios, A. Bontozoglou, and M. D. Logothetis, “Mobility-aware QoS assurance in software-deﬁned radio access networks: An analytical study,” in Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Network Softwarization (NetSoft), London, Apr. 2015, pp. 1–6. [67] D. Wu, D. Arkhipov, E. Asmare, Z. Qin, and J. McCann, “UbiFlow: Mobility management in urban-scale software deﬁned IoT,” in Proc. of the IEEE INFOCOM, Kowloon, Apr. 2015, pp. 208–216. [68] D. Chitimalla, S. Thota, S. Savas, P. Chowdhury, M. Tornatore, S.S. Lee, H.-H. Lee, S. Park, and B. Mukherjee, “Application-aware software-deﬁned EPON access network,” in Proc. of the IEEE Inter-

national Conference on Advanced Networks and Telecommuncations Systems (ANTS), New Delhi, Dec. 2014, pp. 1–6. [69] J. Wang, Y. Yan, and L. Dittmann, “On the design of energy efﬁcient optical networks with Software Deﬁned Networking control across core and access networks,” in Proc. of the International Conference on Optical Network Design and Modeling (ONDM), Brest, Apr. 2013, pp. 47–52. [70] J. Matias, J. Garay, A. Mendiola, N. Toledo, and E. Jacob, “FlowNAC: Flow-based Network Access Control,” in Proc. of the European Workshop on Software Deﬁned Networks (EWSDN), Budapest, Sept. 2014, pp. 79–84. [71] P. Bull, R. Austin, and M. Sharma, “Pre-emptive Flow Installation for Internet of Things Devices within Software Deﬁned Networks,” in Proc. of International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud), Rome, Aug. 2015, pp. 124–130. [72] M. Dong, H. Li, K. Ota, and J. Xiao, “Rule caching in SDN-enabled mobile access networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 40–45, Jul. 2015. [73] H. Li, P. Li, and S. Guo, “MoRule: Optimized rule placement for mobile users in SDN-enabled access networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Austin, TX, Dec. 2014, pp. 4953–4958. [74] R. L. Rardin and R. Uzsoy, “Experimental Evaluation of Heuristic Optimization Algorithms: A Tutorial,” Journal of Heuristics, vol. 7, pp. 261–304, 2001. [75] R. Zheng, W. Yang, and J. Zhou, “Future access architecture: Softwaredeﬁned accesss networking,” in Proc. of the IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), Las Vegas, NV, Jan. 2014, pp. 881–886. [76] M. Usman, A. A. Gebremariam, U. Raza, and F. Granelli, “A Software-Deﬁned Device-to-Device Communication Architecture for Public Safety Applications in 5G Networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 3, pp. 1649–1654, Sept. 2015. [77] V. Sekar, N. Egi, S. Ratnasamy, M. K. Reiter, and G. Shi, “Design and implementation of a consolidated middlebox architecture,” in Proc. of the USENIX conference on Networked Systems Design and Implementation, 2012. [78] O. Haq, Z. Abaid, N. Bhatti, Z. Ahmed, and A. Syed, “SDN-inspired, real-time botnet detection and ﬂow-blocking at ISP and enterpriselevel,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), London, Jun. 2015, pp. 5278–5283. [79] M. Vahlenkamp, F. Schneider, D. Kutscher, and J. Seedorf, “Enabling Information Centric Networking in IP Networks Using SDN,” in Proc. of the IEEE SDN for Future Networks and Services (SDN4FNS), Trento, Nov. 2013, pp. 1–6. [80] A. Chanda, C. Westphal, and D. Raychaudhuri, “Content based trafﬁc engineering in software deﬁned information centric networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE INFOCOM Workshops, Turin, Apr. 2013, pp. 357–362. [81] G. Savarese, M. Vaser, and M. Ruggieri, “A Software Deﬁned Networking-based context-aware framework combining 4G cellular networks with M2M,” in Proc. of the International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC), Atlantic City, NJ, Jun. 2013, pp. 1–6. [82] T. Inoue, T. Mano, K. Mizutani, S.-I. Minato, and O. Akashi, “Rethinking Packet Classiﬁcation for Global Network View of SoftwareDeﬁned Networking ,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols (ICNP), Raleigh, NC, Oct. 2014, pp. 296–307. [83] G. Retvari, J. Tapolcai, A. Korosi, A. Majdan, and Z. Heszberger, “Compressing IP forwarding tables: towards entropy bounds and beyond,” in Proc. of the ACM SIGCOMM, NY, USA, 2013, pp. 111–122. [84] K. Kogan, S. Nikolenko, W. Culhane, P. Eugster, and E. Ruan, “Towards efﬁcient implementation of packet classiﬁers in SDN/OpenFlow,” in Proc. of the ACM HotSDN, 2013, pp. 153–154. [85] J. Liu, S. Zhang, N. Kato, H. Ujikawa, and K. Suzuki, “Device-todevice communications for enhancing quality of experience in software deﬁned multi-tier LTE-A networks,” IEEE Network, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 46–52, Jul. 2015. [86] J. He and W. Song, “Evolving to 5G: A fast and near-optimal request routing protocol for mobile core networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), Austin, TX, Dec. 2014, pp. 4586–4591. [87] T. Shimojo, Y. Takano, A. Khan, S. Kaptchouang, M. Tamura, and S. Iwashina, “Future mobile core network for efﬁcient service operation,” in Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Network Softwarization (NetSoft), London, Apr. 2015, pp. 1–6. [88] R. Trestian, G.-M. Muntean, and K. Katrinis, “MiceTrap: Scalable trafﬁc engineering of datacenter mice ﬂows using OpenFlow,” in Proc.

2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

This article has been accepted for publication in a future issue of this journal, but has not been fully edited. Content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/JIOT.2017.2746186, IEEE Internet of Things Journal
15
of the International Symposium on Integrated Network Management, Ghent, May 2013, pp. 904–907. [89] H. A. Khosravi and M. R. Khayyambashi, “Load-aware virtual network service over a software deﬁned data center network,” in Proc. of Internation Symposium on Telecommunications (IST), Tehran, Sept. 2014, pp. 623–628. [90] M. Gharbaoui, B. Martini, D. Adami, G. Antichi, S. Giordano, and P. Castoldi, “On virtualization-aware trafﬁc engineering in OpenFlow Data Centers networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS), Krakow, May 2014, pp. 1–8. [91] J. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Dai, and B. Benasou, “SDN-based Multi-Class QoS Guarantee in Inter-Data Center Communications,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, 2015, DOI: 10.1109/TCC.2015.2491930. [92] H. Yuan, J. Bi, and B. Li, “Workload-aware request routing in cloud data center using software-deﬁned networking,” Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 151–160, Feb. 2015. [93] P. Polezhaev, A. Shukhman, and A. Konnov, “Development of educational resource datacenters based on software deﬁned networks,” in Proc. of International Science and Technology Conference (Modern Networking Technologies) (MoNeTeC), Moscow, Oct. 2014, pp. 1–7. [94] D. Li, Y. Shang, W. He, and C. Chen, “EXR: Greening Data Center Network with Software Deﬁned Exclusive Routing,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 2534–2544, Nov. 2014. [95] D. Li, Y. Shang, and C. Chen, “Software deﬁned green data center network with exclusive routing,” in Proc. of the IEEE INFOCOM, Toronto, ON, Apr. 2014, pp. 1743–1751. [96] M.-Y. Luo and J.-Y. Chen, “Virtual Transits: A Flexible Platform for Network Virtualization across Data Centers,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science (CloudCom), Singapore, Dec. 2014, pp. 563–570. [97] A. Iyer, P. Kumar, and V. Mann, “Avalanche: Data center Multicast using software deﬁned networking,” in Proc. of International Conference on Communication Systems and Networks (COMSNETS), Bangalore, Jan. 2014, pp. 1–8. [98] V. Mann, A. Vishnoi, K. Kannan, and S. Kalyanaraman, “CrossRoads: Seamless VM mobility across data centers through software deﬁned networking,” in Proc. of Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS), Maui, HI, Apr. 2012, pp. 88–96. [99] P.-W. Chi, Y.-C. Huang, and C.-L. Lei, “Efﬁcient NFV deployment in data center networks,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), London, Jun. 2015, pp. 5290–5295. [100] S. Nastic, S. Sehic, D.-H. Le, H.-L. Truong, and S. Dustdar, “Provisioning Software-Deﬁned IoT Cloud Systems,” in Proc. of Intl. Conf. on Future Internet of Things and Cloud (FiCloud), Barcelona, Aug. 2014, pp. 288–295. [101] N. S., M. Vogler, C. Inzinger, H.-L. Truong, and S. Dustdar, “rtGovOps: A Runtime Framework for Governance in Large-Scale SoftwareDeﬁned IoT Cloud Systems,” in Proc. of the IEEE Intl Conf. on Mobile Cloud Computing, Services, and Engineering (MobileCloud), San Francisco, CA, Mar.–Apr. 2015, pp. 24–33. [102] J. Diaz-Montes, M. AbdelBaky, M. Zou, and M. Parashar, “CometCloud: Enabling Software-Deﬁned Federations for End-to-End Application Workﬂows,” IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 69–73, Feb. 2015. [103] J. Diaz-Montes, M. Diaz-Granados, M. Zou, S. Tao, and M. Parashar, “Supporting Data-intensive Workﬂows in Software-deﬁned Federated Multi-Clouds,” IEEE Transactions on Cloud Computing, 2015, DOI: 10.1109/TCC.2015.2481410. [104] J. Ding, R. Yu, Y. Zhang, S. Gjessing, and D. Tsang, “Service provider competition and cooperation in cloud-based software deﬁned wireless networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 134– 140, Nov. 2015. [105] M. Canini, P. Kuznetsov, D. Levin, and S. Schmid, “Software transactional networking: concurrent and consistent policy composition,” in Proc. of the second ACM SIGCOMM workshop on Hot topics in software deﬁned networking (HotSDN), 2013, pp. 1–6. [106] Z. A. Qazi, C.-C. Tu, L. Chiang, R. Miao, V. Sekar, and M. Yu, “SIMPLE-fying middlebox policy enforcement using SDN,” in Proc. of the ACM Conference on SIGCOMM, 2013, pp. 27–38.
2327-4662 (c) 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

