International Conference on Advanced Logistics and Transport

Decentralized Traffic Management:
A Synchronization-Based Intersection Control
Mohamed Tlig†∗ , Olivier Buffet∗† , Olivier Simonin‡
Université de Lorraine† / INRIA Nancy, France∗
Email: firstname.lastname@loria.fr
CITI-INRIA, INSA de Lyon, France ‡
Email: firstname.lastname@insa-lyon.fr
Abstract—Controlling the vehicle traffic in large networks
remains an important challenge in urban environments and transportation systems. Autonomous vehicles are today considered as a
promising approach to deal with traffic control. In this paper, we
propose a synchronization-based intersection control mechanism
to allow the autonomous vehicle-agents to cross without stopping,
i.e., in order to avoid congestions (delays) and energy loss.
We decentralize the problem by managing the traffic of each
intersection independently from others. We define control agents
which are able to synchronize the multiple flows of vehicles in
each intersection, by alternating vehicles from both directions.
We present experimental results in simulation, which allow to
evaluate the approach and to compare it with a traffic light
strategy. These results show the important gain in terms of time
and energy at an intersection and in a network.
Keywords—Multi-Agent Systems, Vehicle flow synchronization,
Autonomous Vehicles, Traffic Simulations

I.

I NTRODUCTION

In many real transport systems, congestions are generated
at the intersections between the roads [1], i.e., parts of the
space which must be shared by the vehicles. There exist
several methods to manage intersections. The simplest ones
generally favor one flow against the other, as traffic lights
and ”STOP” signals do. Such events generate delays for the
vehicles because they require stopping multiple vehicles for
some time [2]. If the flow of vehicles is important, these local
delays can lead to the emergence of congestions.
This work has been conducted in the context of the InTraDE european project, in which autonomous vehicles transport containers across a seaport1 . Yet, we consider generic road
networks with multiple intersections. Each vehicle follows a
pre-determined path along one lane, without turning (changes
of direction are not treated here). The objective is to reduce
delays and energy consumption, and more generally avoid
blockings.
Our approach consists in synchronizing the flows so that
the vehicles can alternately cross the intersection without
stopping. This requires (1) adapting the vehicles’ speeds so
that the vehicles arrive at the right time to cross the next
intersection without collision, and (2) introducing autonomous
control agents at each intersection to handle incoming vehicles.
We show how to derive the algorithm in each such control
agent and the speed profile for each vehicle as a function of the
1 http://www.intrade-nwe.eu

978-1-4799-4839-0/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE

parameters of the problem (spatial dimensions, default speed,
angle between roads...).
We empirically evaluate this approach, taking into account various parameters which come into play, such as the
throughput of vehicles or the range of the control agent. These
experiments are also a means to show how it compares to
other approaches. To that end, we consider two metrics: the
total delay accumulated by the vehicles while crossing the
intersections, and the energy consumption due to the speed
variations.
This paper is organized as follows. The next section
presents the problem of intersections in general, and existing
work. In Section III we present the principle of the temporal
synchronization of two roads at an intersection, then explain
(i) how to compute the minimum time between two vehicles,
and (ii) the algorithm used by the control agent. Section IV is
devoted to the experimental study –through simulations– of our
model compared to a traditional traffic lights solution. Finally,
we discuss the perspectives of this work in the conclusion.
II.

R ELATED W ORK

In this study, we address the general problem of managing
crossing flows of vehicles in road networks. This problem has
been traditionally studied in operations research and queueing
theory. It typically concerns vehicles driven by humans but,
with the arrival of new technologies, many works integrating
on-line decisions consider an automatic and real-time control.
Several approaches based on communications and GPS (Global
Positioning System) propose to improve existing solutions such
as traffic lights. In [3], the authors propose a new strategy to
improve traveling times of public transports. The system is
based on booking phases of green light at every intersection
and gives priority to buses that are furthest behind. In the same
context, the authors of [4] propose a strategy that gives priority
to buses calculated based on the progress of each of them
(along its route) and also on the progress of the following bus.
Other solutions are interested in fully autonomous vehicle
control. They can be classified into two categories.
Reservation approaches, introduced by Dresner and Stone
in [1], [5], are based on an agent that manages an intersection.
Each vehicle wanting to cross must book a passage time
interval and a route. The advantage of this approach is that,
if several vehicles want to pass and if their paths through the
junction do not intersect, then all of them can be satisfied. But,
109

otherwise, it is necessary to give priority to one vehicle over
the others.
The decentralized approach introduced by Rashe and
Naumann [6], [7] is based mainly on communication and
negotiation between the vehicles to determine the sequence
of passage and exit from the intersection. This approach is
known for its limits, which depend on the number of vehicles
trying to negotiate their passage through the intersection.
III.

I NTERSECTION S YNCHRONIZATION

flow B between them. This means that, on each lane, the
average period between two consecutive vehicles should be at
least T . We distinguish three cases depending on the crossing
angle θ between the two roads: θ = 90◦ , θ < 90◦ and θ > 90◦ .
1) θ = 90◦ : The crossing zone is defined by the square
corresponding to the space shared by the two roads (see
Figure 2). The time required for a vehicle to cross and leave
completely the crossing zone is (l + w)/V . We deduce the
minimum period for passing two vehicles (one from each
flow):

A. Local Synchronization Approach
In this section we define our approach to synchronize the
crossing of vehicle flows at an intersection. Before describing
how it works, we present the type of road network we are
working with. We consider road networks made of roads –with
one lane or two opposite lanes– and their intersections. The
intersections (described by Figure 1) allow crossing a road but
not turning. Roads can intersect at any angle (we first consider
the case when θ = 90◦ , then we generalize).

T =

2(l + w)
,
V

(1)

and the inter-distance between two vehicles from the same flow
is Dmin = T ∗ V − l = 2(l + w) − l = l + 2w (subtracting the
length of a vehicle).
B
Crossing zone

l
w

c

A

l
θ

θ

1

d

b
w

Fig. 2: Crossing zone with an angle θ = 90◦
2

a

Fig. 1: Intersections with 2 flows (left) and 4 flows (right)
Our approach consists in passing alternately –and without
stopping– the vehicles of each road with a sufficient interdistance in order to avoid collisions.

2) θ < 90◦ : In this case, one vehicle can enter the
(diamond-shaped) crossing zone before the previous vehicle
has completely left (see Figure 3). To minimize the time
between two vehicles, the crossing zone must be shared by
both vehicles from each flow.

For this purpose, each intersection is handled by a control
agent. Its main role is to communicate with the vehicles to
manage their passage, allowing them to regulate their speed
so as to arrive at the intersection at the right time. The agent
has a limited communication range, which defines the distance
from which it can start interacting with vehicles approaching
the intersection.
The following section explains in more details:
•

how to determine the period at which the alternation
between roads will take place;

•

how a control agent, given this period, controls the
vehicles close to its intersection.

B. Minimum Time Period for Crossing

B

A0

A

B0

Fig. 3: Shared zone when θ < 90◦

In this paper, all the vehicles are autonomous and identical.
They have a width w, a length l and a default speed V . The
flows are also assumed to be roughly equal on all the lanes of
the network.

We deduce the minimum period for passing two vehicles
from each flow (see details in [8, Appendix]):


θ)
2 w (1−cos
+
l
sin θ
T =
.
(2)
V

At first, we focus on the synchronization of two flows A
and B to allow their crossing without stopping. We seek to
determine the minimum time between two vehicles from the
flow A, denoted by T , that allows passing one vehicle from

3) θ > 90◦ : In this case, there is no (simultaneous) sharing
of the crossing zone between vehicles from the two flows. The
minimum period for passing two vehicles from each flow is
110

(see details in [8, Appendix]):


θ)
2 w (1+cos
+
l
sin θ
T =
.
V

(3)

4) Comments —: T has been determined assuming the
maximum possible flows of vehicle. But, if less vehicles
are going through the intersection, this just implies leaving
“unused” intervals. Also, in practice, T will be increased by
, a safety margin of vehicle inter-distance.
C. Temporal Synchronization of 2 Roads
1) Principle —: Knowing the minimal period T , we organize the passage of vehicles each half-period Tc = T /2,
i.e., one road passing one vehicle at even half-periods (even
multiples of Tc ), while the odd half-periods correspond to
the other road. Figure 4 illustrates this alternating principle
of period Tc .

B

A

2) Synchronizing Vehicles with an Intersection —: A first
observation is that each lane can be handled independently.
Note also that a vehicle could arrive earlier or later than its
originally predicted arrival time. Yet, rather than searching
for the solution optimizing delays or energy consumption, we
decide here to slow down all vehicles.
Considering vehicle agent i entering a control zone at
current time t and at default velocity V , its predicted crossing
time at the intersection is ta = t + R/V (forgetting about
previous vehicles). The closest next half-period is numbered
ni = dta /T − p/2e, where p = 0 or 1 depending whether i
is on an even or odd road. Knowing that the last used halfperiod (by previous vehicles) on this lane is numbered nlast ,
if nlast ≥ ni , then ni should be set to nlast + 1.
Then, to ensure that vehicle agent i enters the crossing zone
at the right time and speed so as to cross the intersection at time
ni T +pTc , it should follow a speed profile such as presented on
Fig. 5, where the vehicle (1) slows down (acceleration a1 < 0),
(2) then runs at constant speed Vx , and (3) finally speeds up
(acceleration a2 > 0).
Speed

R

R

vi
vx

Control Agent
r0

a1

δta1

δtx

a2

δta2
ni*T

0
Alternate the passage of vehicles
A
i Tc

i+1 Tc

B

A
i+2 Tc...

B

A

B

Time

r0

R

B

v

Fig. 5: Speed profile
A

B

...i+n Tc

t

Fig. 4: Synchronization principle of an intersection
One issue is to ensure that the vehicle agents arrive
in crossing zones at the default speed V and at the right
time to be synchronized as desired. This requires a specific
synchronization phase prior to each crossing zone. To that end,
we define two radii from the center of an intersection:
•

r0 (> 0) the distance within which a vehicle is
required to run at the default speed V ; and

•

R (> r0 ) the distance within which an incoming
vehicle should adapt its speed to synchronize with the
intersection (speed changes occur between R and r0
before the center).

This defines a specific control zone for an intersection.
For each vehicle, the synchronization requires computing
(1) at which half period of the crossing zone to pass, and
(2) how to adapt its speed to be synchronized. As a vehicle
agent may not know exactly when to pass, in particular if there
could be conflicts with other vehicles in the same lane, we
need to introduce a control agent at each intersection, which
is in charge of determining when each incoming vehicle agent
should pass, and thus needs perceiving and communicating
with vehicles within range R.

The other constraints for this profile are:
•

the speed is Vi at the start (6= V if the vehicle has
been slowed down by a vehicle in front of him) and
V at the end (as required);

•

the total length is R − r0 ; and

•

the total duration is (ni T + pTc − r0 /V ) − t.

In our simplified model, using the maximum acceleration (a2 )
and deceleration (a1 ) of the vehicle allows minimizing the loss
of kinetic energy.
Solving this problem leads to solving the following
quadratic equation:
a2 Vi − a1 V
a1 − a2
) + Vx ((tp − t) +
)
2a1 a2
a1 a2
a2 Vi2 − a1 V 2
− (ri − r0 ) −
= 0.
2a1 a2

Vx 2 (

A solution exists only if there is enough space to slow down
the vehicle agent as desired. Moreover, we should verify first
if there exist mathematically feasible solutions (∆ ≥ 0), then
the physical feasibility of these solutions, i.e., that the resulting
speeds, distances and durations in the speed profile are all
positive.
111

R

3) Algorithm — : Algorithm 1 thus shows how the control
agent handles a single lane, whose parity is known through
a parameter p ∈ {0, 1}. The algorithm computes for each
vehicle its programmed arrival time tp at the crossing zone, and
the related speed profile (recomputing it regularly to adapt to
unexpected delays). Note also that ni should be computed only
the first time vehicle i enters the control zone. Otherwise, due
to small errors, the value ni could change from one iteration
to the next. This is achieved by assigning a default value of
ni = −1 when vehicle i is first detected by the control agent,
having the control agent remember ni from one iteration to
the next, and computing ni if and only if ni = −1 (line 6).
Algorithm 1: Agent Control of One Lane
Input: lane’s parity int p ∈ [0, 1], current time step t
1 nlast = 0
2 for each vehicle i perceived at distance r0 < ri < R
3 (sorted by increasing distance) do
4
Get ri , Vi /* (ni is stored in the control agent’s
memory)
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

ta = t + ri /Vi
if ni = −1 /* i just entered the control zone
then
ni = dta /T − p/2e
if ni ≤ nlast then ni = nlast + 1
nlast = ni
tp = ni ∗ T + p ∗ Tc − r0 /V
Calculate and Send the speed profile to vehicle i

*/
*/

4) Minimum Radii — : The radii r0 and R should not be
taken arbitrarily.
r0 should be such that, when the center of vehicle i is at
distance r0 from the center of the intersection, then the nose
of i has not yet entered the crossing zone. This implies

r0

w

Control
Agent

l

Fig. 6: Radii R and r0

two vehicles from lanes a and c pass simultaneously at the
intersection, then two vehicles from b and d, and so on.
The minimum period T for crossing must be adjusted to
this specific case to account for (i) the size of the new crossing
zone, and (ii) the synchronization pattern the vehicles should
follow. Let λ be the distance separating two opposite lanes of
the same road (see Fig. 7). The minimum period is (see details
in [8, Appendix]):


2(w+ λ
2)
2
+
l
sin θ
T =
.
(4)
V
Furthermore, we should adapt the radius r0 to this configuration. Thus, instead of using the width w of a vehicle as the
width of the road, we will consider the width of a two-lane
road.
The control agent’s algorithm is unchanged, each lane
being handled independently of the other lanes, e.g., each lane
having its own nlast variable. One should just pay attention to
the fact that, for a given lane, distances are not computed with
respect to the center of the crossing zone, but with respect to
the middle of the lane’s segment inside the crossing zone, as
illustrated on Figure 7.

w max(cos θ2 , cos π−θ
l
2 )
+
2
sin θ
(see details in [8, Appendix]).

θ

r0 ≥

R should be such that the quadratic equation can always
be solved (satisfying the aforementioned mathematical and
physical constraints) For a single vehicle, the limit case is
when it just misses a period, and should thus wait for the
next period, i.e., the duration of the speed profile will be
0
0
tp − t = R−r
+ T +  instead of R−r
+ . This problem
V
V
becomes more complex when multiple vehicles have to queue.
Indeed, there is no ideal solution for R because there can
always be vehicles arriving in overly large numbers. In practice
(see experiments) we ensure that the radius R is large enough
to allow the application of the speed profile, but check that
this radius remains reasonable.
D. Road with Two Opposite Lanes
In this section we briefly show how to adapt the solution
presented in the previous sections to the case of two roads each
made of two opposite lanes, i.e., the case –shown on Figure 1
(right)– we will consider in our experiments.
First, due to symmetries, vehicles from the same road
should go through the crossing zone simultaneously, i.e.,

λ

Fig. 7: Crossing zone in the case of 2 opposite lanes in each
road

IV.

E XPERIMENTAL R ESULTS

In this section we evaluate our approach on a network of
three roads organized as a triangle, giving results for a single
intersection between two two-lane roads, as in Figure 8, before
considering more complex networks.
We compare our approach to a strategy based on traffic
lights with a fixed time for each cycle. A traffic light is placed
at the entrance of each flow of the intersection. The lights can
switch the passage of vehicles between two roads, for fixed
(equal) periods.
A. Simulations
We have developed (in JAVA) a continuous-space and
discrete-time simulator of a network of roads.
112

25

Traffic lights 30
Traffic lights 20
Traffic lights 10
Synchronization T=3,2s

Delay (seconds)

20

15

10

5

Fig. 8: Simulator : illustration of an intersection control

0
0

The detailed experimental setting for our three-road network is the following:
•

roads are 1000m long and the angle of the intersection
is π3 ;

•

the control agents’ range of action R is 200m and
r0 = 30m;

•

the maximum speed of each vehicle is 10m/s, the
maximum acceleration is 1.5m/s2 and the maximum
deceleration is −1.5m/s2 ;

•

we used a near-to-near longitudinal control developed
in [9], which ensures a collision-free behavior between
the same lane vehicles (only outside the control zone);

•

at each entrance of the network, we installed a source
that generates vehicles following a Bernoulli distri1
(D is the average time, in
bution with parameter D
seconds, between two consecutive injections);

•

the vehicles have dimension l = 5m, w = 2.5m and
safety margin of vehicle inter-distance  = 1.5m;

•

Simulation time step is set to 0.1s.

In this case, the minimum period is T = 3.2s.
For the traffic lights approach, we can fix the green and red
times for each flow. We vary their duration in the following
subsection but the reference value is equal to 30s for each
color. The green lights of the same road are turned on at the
same time.
B. Comparing Various Strategies
Our objective is to compare our approach with traffic lights
by observing the resulting delays —i.e., the difference between
the theoretical and actual traversal times— when 100 vehicles
traverse the network under a high injection frequency (D =
4s), i.e., heavy traffic.
Figure 9 presents simulation results for our algorithm and
traffic lights with different durations (10s, 20s, 30s). The
X axis represents the number of vehicles having left the
network in their output order and the Y axis gives the vehicle’s
average delay in seconds (plus standard deviation) over 100
simulations.

10

20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Number of vehicles having left the network

90

100

Fig. 9: Synchronization vs. Traffic lights

Our approach is clearly more efficient in this experiment
compared to traffic lights. Here, the worst delay produced by
a vehicle with the local synchronization approach does not
exceed 6s, while for traffic lights it exceeds 20s (maximum
value with the standard deviations using 30s duration). The
average delay is below 4s for the local synchronization while,
for the best traffic lights curve, it is around 9s (using 10s or
20s duration). We also tested the traffic lights strategy with
less than 10s duration and we observed that the average delay
increases significantly. This is mainly due to vehicles requiring
more time to traverse an intersection when they have to restart,
which even leads to queue formations and collisions at or
below 5s.
C. Effect of Varying R
In this section, we measure the effect of varying the range
of action R of the control agent to evaluate whether this
influences the quality of our solution (without modifying r0 ).
Table I gives the averages and the standard deviations of the
energy consumed when R = 50m, R = 100m and R = 200m.
This consumed energy is measured through the total change in
velocity during the travel of 1000 vehicles. We observe that the
delays do not change significantly, but there is a difference in
terms of energy consumed when we reduce the crossing zone.
It increases when we use a small R. This is due to the small
distance that forces the control agent to slow down the vehicles
suddenly.
TABLE I: Averages and Standard Deviations of the Energy
Consumed
D = 10s
Average Energy
Standard Deviation

50m
8.6
±3.1

100m
5.2
±3.84

200m
4
±4.6

D. Effect of Varying D
We want to see here if our approach is efficient when
the vehicles’ throughput is higher (generally the reservation
based approaches, as in [1], have poor resistance). Figure 10
113

shows the variations of delays depending on the injection
throughputs. The plotted histograms are averages of 10000
vehicles. We used D with the values 1s, 2s, 3s, 4s and
6s which correspond respectively to the throughputs 60, 30,
20,15 and 10 vehicles/minute for each source. According to
the figure, the average delay increases slightly (less than 1s)
when the throughput is less than the minimal period of the
intersection (3.2s). Immediately thereafter (using 30veh/m
and 60veh/m) we saturate the system, as also observed by
[1].

Average Delay (seconds)

400

V.

C ONCLUSION

In this paper we addressed the problem of automatically
controlling vehicle crossings on a network, or more generally
of mobile agents (e.g., robots). To that end, we proposed a
strategy based on a local control of vehicles at intersections. It
consists in spacing vehicles such that they can cross without
being stopped. By synchronizing the arrival of vehicles with a
similar period, but phase-shifted by a half period, vehicles from
both flows pass alternately. Therefore the vehicles potentially
face a slight slow-down in order to be able to cross the
intersection, which is better than stopping them.
Based on this principle, we defined a crossroad/intersection
agent at each intersection which uses only its local perceptions
of the traffic. It determines the instructions for each vehicle to
cross the intersection based on its distance and on the parity
assigned to the road. The experimental study demonstrated the
ability to regulate the traffic at intersections, and the significant
gain in terms of time compared to a conventional traffic lights
system.

350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
10
15
20
30
60
Throughput of each source (vehicles/minute)

Fig. 10: Throughput variation

E. Increasing the number of intersections
We tested our approach on a network of three two-lane
roads with five intersections (Figure 11). Note that intersections are independent, each with its own angle-dependent
period. The measurements on this network give equivalent
gains to one intersection. The approach appears scalable as
a consequence of its decentralized nature. We verified in
all our simulations that we never have collisions between
vehicles. A video showing the simulator can be viewed at
http://www.loria.fr/%7Emtlig/#Videos.
Future works will be dedicated to the network level, by
focusing on the question of synchronization between control
agents. This involves looking for synchronization relationships
between the agents linked by the same road, and how they can
cooperate to further optimize the traffic.

Future work includes first continuing the experimental
study to test the limits of our approach and further evaluate
it in a wide variety of scenarios. The other perspective that
motivates our research is to let the control agents communicate
and synchronize with each other in order to further improve the
traffic on the network, typically by inducing green waves. As
these synchronization constraints involve neighboring intersections, locally interacting control agents could find a globally
efficient solution.
R EFERENCES
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

K. Dresner and P. Stone, “Multiagent traffic management: A reservationbased intersection control mechanism,” in Proceedings of the Third
International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent
Systems (AAMAS), 2004.
C. Fok, M. Hanna, S. Gee, T. Au, P. Stone, C. Julien, and S. Vishwanath, “A platform for evaluating autonomous intersection management
policies,” in Third International Conference on Cyber-Physical Systems
(ICCPS). IEEE, 2012, pp. 87–96.
N. Bhouri, F. Balbo, S. Pinson, and M. Tlig, “Collaborative agents for
modeling traffic regulation systems,” in Web Intelligence and Intelligent
Agent Technology (WI-IAT), 2011 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on, vol. 2, aug. 2011, pp. 7 –13.
N. Hounsell and B. Shrestha, “A new approach for co-operative bus
priority at traffic signals,” Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 13,
no. 1, pp. 6 –14, 2012.
K. Dresner and P. Stone, “Multiagent traffic management: An improved
intersection control mechanism,” in Proceedings of the Fourth International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(AAMAS), 2005.
R. Naumann and R. Rasche, Intersection collision avoidance by means of
decentralized security and communication management of autonomous
vehicles. Univ.-GH, SFB 376, 1997.
R. Naumann, R. Rasche, J. Tacken, and C. Tahedi, “Validation and
simulation of a decentralized intersection collision avoidance algorithm,”
in Intelligent Transportation System (ITSC’97), IEEE, 1997, pp. 818–823.
M. Tlig, O. buffet, and O. Simonin, “Decentralized traffic management:
A synchronization-based intersection control – extended version,” Tech.
Rep., 2014, http://hal.inria.fr/hal-00960735.
A. Scheuer, O. Simonin, and F. Charpillet, “Safe longitudinal platoons
of vehicles without communication,” in Proceedings of the international
conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2009, pp. 2835–2840.

Fig. 11: Illustration of 5 intersections control

114

