Beamwidth of Base Stations for Maximizing Coverage of Aerial Users

Honggu Kang School of EE
KAIST Daejeon, Korea khg13@kaist.ac.kr

Jingon Joung School of EEE Chung-Ang Univ. Seoul, Korea jgjoung@cau.ac.kr

Joonhyuk Kang School of EE
KAIST Daejeon, Korea jhkang@ee.kaist.ac.kr

Abstract—In this paper, we investigate cellular-enabled unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) communications. The UAVs are regarded as aerial users. To operate UAVs safely and efﬁciently, the proper adjustment of network parameters should be considered. To tackle with this issue, the coverage probability of UAVs in terms of beamwidth of ground base stations (BSs) that have directional antennas is analytically studied. We employ stochastic geometry approach to analyze the performance. Numerical results show that beamwidth of the antennas has a signiﬁcant effect on the network performance and the optimized beamwidth improves the network performance. This work provides useful insights for establishing networks and a framework for further studying cellular-enabled UAV communications.
Index Terms—Cellular network, coverage probability, beamwidth, stochastic geometry, unmanned aerial vehicle.

UAV
hU Θ
hB
Fig. 1. System model with randomly distributed BSs following homogeneous PPP that have directional antennas of half-power beamwidth Θ. The UAVs ﬂy at a ﬁxed altitude hU and the BSs have ﬁxed height hB .

I. INTRODUCTION
Over recent years, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have attracted much attention with their beneﬁts in multiple industries followed from their affordable prices owing to advancements in hardware technology. The UAVs have their beneﬁts in ﬂexibility in movement and they have a lot of chances to employ their beneﬁts. For example, the UAVs could be employed as wireless communication provider [1]–[3]. There have been several projects exploiting aerial platforms in wireless communications such as Google Loon, Facebook Aquila Drone, European Commision project ABSOLUTE [4]– [6]. Furthermore, Amazon PrimeAir project aims to deliver packages with small UAVs [7]. To perform missions well in several industries, safe and reliable operating UAVs is a critical issue. To tackle with this issue, cellular communications with UAVs could be an appealing solution. In such cellular network, the UAVs as aerial users formulate communication links with ground base stations (BSs).
In cellular network, the performance analysis (e.g., coverage probability, outage probability) is worth being studied. However, in order to characterize the performance, most of studies make use of time consuming simulations. Even though UAVs have different channel charactersistics with ground users, there are few literatures studying the performance analysis of UAV cellular communications. In [10], cellular-enabled UAVs are optimized under minimum SNR target constraint and their performance are numerically analyzed. Furthermore, in [8], the downlink coverage analysis for network of UAVs for a

ﬁnite space was studied, while the coverage probability of downlink from UAV-BS was studied in [9]. In this paper, we study the performance of UAV cellular communications in terms of ground BS antenna beamwidth analytically so that the performance gets characterized much easier and provide insights for BS antenna architecture.
The rest of paper is organized as follows. We introduce our cellular network architecture system model in section II. In section III, coverage probability formulation as well as expressions are presented. In section IV, numerical results provide insights on UAV cellular communications and concluding remarks are followed in section V.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

As shown in Fig. 1, we consider UAVs that are cellular-

connected. The UAVs are assumed to ﬂy at a ﬁxed altitude

hU , and all ground BSs have the height hB. The ground BSs are randomly located according to a homogeneous PPP Φ of

density λ, and the ground BSs are equipped with directional

antennas of which beamwidth is adjustable. Each BS has

antenna pattern of horizontally omnidirectional and vertically

directional. The half-power beamwidth of antenna pattern is

denoted as 2Θ in radians, with Θ ∈

0,

π 2

.

Moreover,

the

antennas are not tilted to consider both terrestrial and aerial

users. Assuming that there is no interference between users

(i.e., aerial and terrestrial users) by virtue of a orthogonal

multiple access (e.g., frequency division multiple access, time

978-1-7281-1340-1/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

108

ICUFN 2019

division multiple access). The antenna gain in direction θ =

arctan

hU −hB r

is approximately modeled as [3]

G(r) =

G0 Θ2

,

−Θ ≤ arctan

hU −hB r

≤Θ

0, otherwise,

(1)

where r denotes the horizontal distance between a UAV and

the

associated

BS

and

G0

=

30000 22

×

π 180

2 ≈ 2.2846.

It is assumed that all BSs transmit at the same power, and

the receiver suffers from small scale fading. Then, the received

power of an aerial user at horizontal distance r can be modeled

as follows [2]:

PRx(r) = PTxG(r)d−αη−1Ω,

(2)

where PTx denotes ﬁxed transmit power, d = r2 + (hU − hB)2 denotes the distance between the UAV
and the associated BS, α denotes the path loss exponent, η denotes excessive path loss, and Ω denotes the small scale fading gain. A Nakagami-m fading model is assumed that the channel gain Ω follows a gamma distribution as follows:

fΩ(ω)

=

mmωm−1 Γ(m)

exp(−mω),

(3)

where m represents an integer-valued fading parameter and

Γ(·) denotes gamma function. For Nakagami-m fading model,

if the parameter m = 1, the fading model is equivalent to

Rayleigh fading model and, m → ∞ denotes that there is

no fading. Then, the signal-to-noise (SNR) at the receiver of

horizontal distance r from the associated BS is represented as

follows:

SNR

=

PRx(r) σ2

,

(4)

where σ2 denotes the noise power. Assuming the ﬁxed height

of both BSs and UAVs, the SNR is a function of horizontal

distance r.

III. COVERAGE PROBABILITY

In this section, the coverage probability is obtained. For a given SNR threshold T , the coverage probability Pcov of UAV is represented as follows:

Pcov = P(SNR > T )

∞

= P [SNR > T |r] fR(r)dr,

(5)

0

where fR(r) denotes the probability density function (pdf) of the associated BS’s horizontal distance.

Theorem 1. The coverage probability of the link between a UAV and the associated BS is obtained as

Pcov =

∞ rm

m−1 k=0

sk k!

exp

(−s) fR(r)dr,

(6)

where s is given by

s

=

T σ2mΘ2 PTxG0d−αη−1 ,

(7)

fR(r) denotes the pdf of the distance of the nearest BS that

is

farther

than

rm,

and

rm

=

h tan(Θ)

.

Proof. The coverage probability is rewritten as follows:

P [SNR > T |r]

=P

PRx(r) σ2

>

T

=P

PTx G(r)d−α η−1 Ω σ2

>

T

=P

Ω

>

T σ2 PTx G(r)d−α η−1

m−1
(=a)

sk k!

exp (−s)

,

(8)

k=0

where s

=

. T σ2m
PTx G(r )d−α η−1

The

(a)

follows

from

gamma

random variable with an integer parameter m. Meanwhile, the

antenna gain G(r) is zero if arctan

hU −hB r

> Θ. As a result,

the coverage probability is zero if r is smaller than rm. Then,

assuming that UAVs associate with the closest BS with non-

zero power gain, the coverage probability can be rewritten as

(6).

Lemma 1. The pdf of the distance of the nearest BS farther than rm, fR(r) has the distribution of

fR(r) = 2λπr exp −λπ r2 − rm2 , r ≥ rm. (9)

Proof. For homogeneous PPP in R2, the number of points in Borel set A is represented as (λL(A))n /n! · exp (−λL(A))

where L(A) denotes the area of A (see [11] for more details).

Then, the contact distribution function in the area between

outer circle of radius r and inner circle of radius rm is noted

as

1 − exp −λπ r2 − rm2 ,

(10)

which also represents the cumulative distribution function (cdf) of the distance of the nearest point that is farther than rm. Therefore, the pdf is derived as (9).

Then, from (6) and (9), the coverage probability is obtained. The fading parameter m, path loss exponent α, and the excessive path loss η represents the various channel model. For the particular case of m = 1, which represents the Rayleigh fading channel, the coverage probability is obtained as follows:

∞

Pcov =

exp (−s) 2λπr exp −λπ r2 − rm2 dr, r ≥ rm.

rm
(11)

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we provide insights through numerical results. The simulation parameters are set as Table I. The airto-ground channel is usually characterized as dominant lineof-sight links. Therefore, the excessive path loss η is set as small value and Nakagami-m fading parameter m is set as 3 that reﬂects less fading than Rayleigh fading.
The coverage probability in terms of beamwidth with varying BS density is shown in Fig. 2, when the UAV ﬂies at

109

Coverage probability Pcov Coverage probability Pcov

TABLE I PARAMETERS FOR NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS

Parameter
PTx (dB) hB (m) T (dB) Bandwidth (MHz) Noise spectral density (dBm/Hz)
α η (dB)
m

Value
20 30 30 10 -101 2.09 2.3 3

0.9

0.8

0.7
0.6
λ = 10, 30, 50, 70, 90
0.5

1

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

hU = 330, 280, 230, 180

0.1

0

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Half-power beamwidth Θ (deg)

Fig. 3. Coverage probability in terms of half-power beamwidth Θ for ground
BSs of density hU = 330, 280, 230, 180 m (black, red, green, blue in order) when λ = 50 (BSs/km2).

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1 0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Half-power beamwidth Θ (deg)

Fig. 2. Coverage probability in terms of half-power beamwidth Θ for ground BSs of density λ = 10, 30, 50, 70, 90 (BSs/km2) when hU = 230 m.

numerical results provide nontrivial insights. The results in this paper would be a framework for further studying cellularenabled UAV communications. The network performance analysis considering both terrestrial and aerial users, multicell interference analysis remains as a further work.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (2018R1A4A1023826)

the altitude hU = 230 m. The coverage probability has optimal point that maximizes coverage probability. The coverage probability gets large as density of BSs gets large. However, the coverage probability converges as more BSs are deployed since transmit power is limited. It is worth being noted that the optimal beamwidth is not full covering π/2 that the phisically closest BS may not associate with the aerial users.
Fig. 3 shows the coverage probability in terms of beamwidth with different UAV altitudes when BS density λ = 50 (BSs/km2). As the altitude UAV ﬂies gets higher, the coverage probability decreases. However, the overall tendency of coverage probability in terms of beamwidth is similar. Remarkably, the optimal beamwidth value is about 18◦ for varying altitudes that does not vary a lot. We can ﬁnd the rationale that the transmit power degradation owing to increasing beamwidth would be more dominant than others.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we investigated the performance of cellularenabled UAVs (i.e., aerial users) in terms of BS antenna beamwidth. We modeled the cellular network architecture with BSs following homogenous PPP that have directional antennas. Then, the coverage probability was presented. The

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Zeng, R. Zhang, and T. J. Lim, “Wireless communications with unmanned aerial vehicles: Opportunities and challenges,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 36-42, May 2016.
[2] H. Kang, J. Joung, J. Ahn, and J. Kang, “Secrecy-Aware altitude optimization for quasi-static UAV base station without eavesdropper location information,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 851– 854, May 2019.
[3] H. He, S. Zhang, Y. Zeng and R. Zhang, “Joint Altitude and Beamwidth Optimization for UAV-Enabled Multiuser Communications,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 344–347, Feb. 2018.
[4] Facebook, Connecting the World from the Sky. Facebook, Technical Report, 2014
[5] Google Loon Project. [Online]. Available: http://www.google.com/ loon/ [6] CORDIS. ABSOLUTE (Aerial base stations with opportunistic links for
unexpected and temporary events), Project reference 318632. [Online]. Available: http://www.absolute-project.eu/ [7] Amazon PrimeAir Project. [Online]. Available: http://www.amazon.com/ Amazon-Prime-Air/b?ie=UTF8&node=8037720011 [8] V. V. Chetlur and H. S. Dhillon, “Downlink coverage analysis for a ﬁnite 3-D wireless network of unmanned aerial vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 10, pp. 4543–4558, Oct. 2017. [9] P. K. Sharma and D. I. Kim, “Coverage probability of 3-D mobile UAV networks,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 97–100, Feb. 2019. [10] S. Zhang, Y. Zeng and R. Zhang, “Cellular-Enabled UAV communication: trajectory optimization under connectivity constraint,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Kansas City, MO, May 2018, pp. 1–6. [11] D. Moltchanov, “Distance distributions in random networks,” Ad Hoc Netw., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 1146–1166, Mar. 2012.

110

