STAT121 / AC209 / E-109
CS109 Data Science
Hanspeter Pﬁster pﬁster@seas.harvard.edu
Joe Blitzstein blitzstein@stat.harvard.edu
Verena Kaynig vkaynig@seas.harvard.edu

• What? • Why? • Who? • How?

Outline

• What? • Why? • Who? • How?

Outline

Data Science
To gain insights into data through   computation, statistics, and visualization

A Data Scientist Is...
“A data scientist is someone who knows more statistics than a computer scientist and more
computer science than a statistician.” - Josh Blumenstock
“Data Scientist = statistician + programmer + coach + storyteller + artist” - Shlomo Aragmon

Nate Silver

“Nate Silver won the election” – Harvard Business Review

#natesilverfacts

http://techcrunch.com/2012/11/07/nate-silver-as-software/

Nate Silver on Pundits
Silver:“Pundits are no better than a coin toss.”
Stewart:“Do you foresee a coin getting its own show?
The coin toss show?”
http://www.thedailyshow.com/watch/wed-october-17-2012/nate-silver

Some Key Principles
• use many data sources (the plural of anecdote is not data) • understand how the data were collected (sampling is essential) • weight the data thoughtfully (not all polls are equally good) • use statistical models (not just hacking around in Excel) • understand correlations (e.g., states that trend similarly) • think like a Bayesian, check like a frequentist (reconciliation) • have good communication skills (What does a 60%
probability even mean? How can we visualize, validate, and understand the conclusions?)

Netﬂix Prize

Netﬂix Prize Progress
HBR, Oct 2012

3 Years Later…
“We evaluated some of the new methods ofﬂine but the additional accuracy gains that we measured did not seem to justify the engineering effort needed to bring them into a production environment.”
Xavier Amatriain and Justin Basilico, 2012

Some Challenges
• massive data (500k users, 20k movies, 100m ratings) • curse of dimensionality (very high-dimensional
problem)
• missing data (99% of data missing; not missing at random)
• extremely complicated set of factors that affect people’s ratings of movies (actors, directors, genre, ...)
• need to avoid overﬁtting (test data vs. training data)

Kaggle

The Connectome
How is the mammalian brain wired?
~60 um3 600 GB Courtesy of Bobby Kasthuri.
Harvard

The Data Challenge
• Pixel resolution: 3-5 nm; Slice thickness: 30-50 nm • 1 mm3: 40 Gpixels x 25,000 slices = ~1 PByte
Daniel Berger

Connectome Workflow

Cutting

Imaging

Alignment & Registration

Analysis

Proof Reading

Visualization

Segmentation

Analysis
K. Al-Awami, et al., “NeuroLines: A Subway Map Metaphor for Visualizing Nanoscale Neuronal Connectivity, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2369-2378, 2014

Data Science

Computer Science

Statistics

Domain Science

Drew Conway

Machine Data Management

Human Human Cognition

Data Mining

Perception

Machine Learning Visualization

Story Telling

Business Intelligence Statistics

Decision Making Theory

Data Science

Inspired by Daniel Keim, “Visual Analytics: Deﬁnition, Process, and Challenges”

Outline
• What? • Why? • Who? • How?

The Age of Big Data
BBC, 2013

Big Data
“Between the dawn of civilization and 2003, we only created ﬁve exabytes of information; now we’re creating that amount every two days.”
Eric Schmidt, Google (and others)

http://onesecond.designly.com/

travers808, Visual.ly

Jim Gray, Microsoft

“By 2018, the US could face a shortage of up to 190,000 workers with analytical skills”
McKinsey Global Institute
“The sexy job in the next 10 years will be statisticians.” Data Scientists?
Hal Varian, Prof. Emeritus UC Berkeley Chief Economist, Google

Hal Varian Explains...
The ability to take data – to be able to understand it, to process it, to extract value from it, to visualize it, to communicate it's going to be a hugely important skill in the next decades, not only at the professional level but even at the educational level for elementary school kids, for high school kids, for college kids. Because now we really do have essentially free and ubiquitous data.” – Hal Varian

Ask an interesting question.

What is the scientiﬁc goal? What would you do if you had all the data? What do you want to predict or estimate?

Get the data.

How were the data sampled? Which data are relevant? Are there privacy issues?

Explore the data.

Plot the data. Are there anomalies? Are there patterns?

Model the data.

Build a model. Fit the model. Validate the model.

Communicate and visualize the results.

What did we learn? Do the results make sense?
Can we tell a story?

IPython Notebooks
http://nbviewer.ipython.org/

Outline
• What? • Why? • Who? • How?

Hanspeter Pﬁster
An Wang Professor of Computer Science, SEAS Director, Institute for Applied Computational Science
pﬁster@seas.harvard.edu / @hpﬁster

Joe Blitzstein
Professor of the Practice in Statistics, Co-Director of Undergraduate Studies in Statistics
blitz@fas.harvard.edu, twitter @stat110, SC 714

Verena Kaynig-Fittkau 
Lecturer and research scientist at IACS vkaynig@seas.harvard.edu, NW B164

Rahul Dave 
Head TF and Lecturer at IACS rahuldave@gmail.com, NW B164

CS 109 Staff

Andrew Reece Antonio Coppola Austen Novis Brian Feeny Dana Katzenelson Giri Gopalan Irma Nomani Jacob Dorabialski Joseph Song Kathy Li Lawrence Kim Leandra King

Luis Campos Marcus Way Michael Ma Michael Packer Nelson Santos Richard Kim Rick Wei-Jong Lee Sail Wu Stephen Klosterman Xintao Qiu Yingzhuo (Diana) Zhang Yuhao Zhu

About You

• What? • Why? • Who? • How?

Outline

CS109 Key Facets
• data munging/scraping/sampling/cleaning in order to get an informative, manageable data set;
• data storage and management in order to be able to access data quickly and reliably during subsequent analysis;
• exploratory data analysis to generate hypotheses and intuition about the data;
• prediction based on statistical tools such as regression, classiﬁcation, and clustering; and
• communication of results through visualization, stories, and interpretable summaries.

Act I: Predictions
• Data Collection,“Munging”, and Storage • Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) • Classiﬁcation & Regression • Cross Validation • Dimensionality Reduction • Effective Communication & Writing

Act II: Recommendations
• Support Vector Machines • Decision Trees & Random Forests • Bagging & Boosting • Machine Learning Best Practices • MapReduce,Amazon’s EC2, and Spark

Act III: Clustering & Text
• Bayesian Thinking & Naive Bayes • Text Analysis: LDA & Topic Modeling • Clustering • Effective Presentations • Deep Learning • Guest Lecture: Experimental Design

cs109.org

Concepts... Lectures

...and Skills Sections

Sections
• Introduce tools & skills; available as lab notebooks and videos
• Mandatory, except for DCE students • First (group) section this Friday! • 10am-12pm in MD G115 • Regular sections ﬁrst week as ofﬁce hours
to get help with Python, Git, and HW0

Section Schedule (TBD)

9:00 AM 10:00 AM 11:00 AM 12:00 PM 1:00 PM 2:00 PM 3:00 PM 4:00 PM 5:00 PM 6:00 PM 7:00 PM 8:00 PM

Monday
Leandra NW-B150
Diana NW-B150 Joseph NW-B150
Austen, Dana NW-B150 and B166

Tuesday
Ima NW-B150

Wednesday Rahul, NW-B150 Steve NW-B150

Thursday

Lecture NW-B103
Sail, Nelson NW-B150 and B166 Kathi NW-B150

Lawrence NW-B150 Antonio NW-B150 Richard NW-B150

Lecture NW-B103

Friday
Luis NW-B150
Michael Ma NW-B150 Michael Packer NW-B150

Homework
• Real-World focus • Scrape and wrangle messy data • Apply sophisticated statistical analysis • Visualize and communicate results • Election data, music charts,
recommendations, etc.

Programming

xkcd

Piazza
• Sign up by next Friday (HW0) • Announcements posted here • Questions, feedback, discussions, etc. • Help each other!

Grades
• No exams! • 50% Homework • 40% Projects (3-4 person teams) • 10% Participation (Piazza & Sections) • 10 point scale, holistic grading

Projects

Policies
• HWs due on Thursdays, 11:59 pm EST • 6 late days for HW (no questions asked) • Cannot submit HW later than 2 days • Regrading requests within 7 days in writing
• Grade may improve or go down

Collaboration Policy
• Work you turn in must be your own • Projects are a 3-4 person team effort
• With project group peer assessment • Acknowledge all help and code you used • Harvard Honor Code

Is this course for me ???

Prerequisites
Programming experience
• CS50 and/or C, C++, Java, Python, etc.
Basic statistical knowledge
• STAT100, ideally STAT110
Willingness to learn new software & tools
• This can be time consuming • You will need to read online documentation

Be Patient Be Flexible Be Constructive

http://davidzinger.wordpress.com/2007/05/page/2/

Next Steps
• HW 0, mandatory, needs to be submitted!
• Good test of your basic skills • Complete the survey by tomorrow! Needed to be
able to submit HW 0
• Installation of several Python frameworks • Not graded, do it as soon as possible
• Read syllabus carefully

Important Links
• Create a github account at http://github.com • Then ﬁll in our survey at http://goo.gl/forms/bJwajS8zO8 • HW 0 document at https://github.com/cs109/2015lab1/
blob/master/hw0.ipynb
• Week 1 notebooks at https://github.com/cs109/2015lab1 • HW repositories will be created for you on github. See
HW 0 for details.

