Green Resource Management for Over-The-Top Services in 5G Networks using Matching Theory

Eftychia Datsika∗, Angelos Antonopoulos†, Nikos Passas‡, Georgios Kormentzas§, Christos Verikoukis† ∗IQUADRAT Informatica S. L., Barcelona, Spain
†Telecommunications Technological Center of Catalonia (CTTC/CERCA), Castelldefels, Spain ‡National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Department of Informatics & Telecommunications, Athens, Greece §University of the Aegean, Department of Information & Communication Systems Engineering, Karlovassi, Greece
Email: edatsika@iquadrat.com, {aantonopoulos, cveri}@cttc.es, passas@di.uoa.gr, gkorm@aegean.gr

Abstract—Nowadays, over-the-top (OTT) applications can be accessed via Internet connections over cellular networks. Mobile network operators (MNOs) strive to accommodate mobile trafﬁc through energy efﬁcient shared networks. The OTT service providers (OSPs) need to interact with MNOs and require resources for offering desired quality-of-service (QoS) levels to users of different categories, with different QoS requirements, which imply prioritization of certain OTT ﬂows. Resource scheduling should respect network neutrality, which forbids OSP prioritization. Furthermore, OSPs request resources periodically, according to their performance goals, causing delay in ﬂows’ accommodation due to i) the time required for information exchange between OSPs and MNOs, affected by network congestion, and ii) the time required for ﬂows to receive resources, affected by the number of active ﬂows. The intervention of OSPs may induce additional energy cost for the MNOs and affect the mobile network energy efﬁciency. Acknowledging the lack of OSP-oriented resource management approaches, we introduce a matching theoretic ﬂow prioritization (MTFP) algorithm and investigate delay and energy efﬁciency through extensive simulations. Our study shows that MTFP improves both metrics comparing to the best effort approach, whereas its performance is affected by the OTT trafﬁc level and the frequency of resource allocation process.
Keywords—Over-the-top services, Energy efﬁciency, Wireless network virtualization, Resource management, Matching theory.
I. INTRODUCTION The global mobile data trafﬁc is expected to increase sevenfold until 2021 [1], stressing the need for high network capacity in the ﬁfth generation (5G) wireless networks and motivating the design of energy efﬁcient mobile network deployments [2]. Aiming to serve the users without excessive expenditures, the mobile network operators (MNOs) share their infrastructure and spectrum. Different network sharing architectures are speciﬁed in the long term evolution advanced (LTE-A) mobile communication standard [3]. Shared LTE-A networks can be virtualized, i.e., resources can be abstracted into virtual slices (VSs) managed by MNOs in isolation. Modern applications based on mobile Internet connectivity, i.e., over-the-top (OTT) applications (e.g., YouTube, Skype, etc.) have introduced OTT service providers (OSPs) that offer their communication services over the MNOs’ networks. A large portion of mobile data is related to user equipment terminals (UEs) that generate OTT application ﬂows. The OSPs beneﬁt from the popularity of their applications, thus they are motivated to improve the quality-of-service (QoS) of ﬂows, which may have different QoS demands, e.g., low latency for gaming or high data rate for video streaming.

Each application may also involve different user categories, e.g., free or premium users, which generate ﬂows of dissimilar importance. However, when resources are allocated to the UEs, the ﬂows’ priorities are not considered and VSs are allocated in a best effort manner [4]. The OSPs are not involved in the VS allocation, do not control their performance indicators, e.g., grade of service (GoS), and cannot not apply ﬂow prioritization, as MNOs fully control the UEs’ connections.
The intervention of OSPs in resource management of ﬂows can be proﬁtable for both OSPs and MNOs, as delivering high quality services is a goal of both parties. Notably, cooperation of OSPs and MNOs for the joint deployment of network infrastructure has demonstrated their common interests [5]. However, it is not clear how the resources can be shared among OSPs, when ﬂows of different priorities coexist. The network resources should be shared impartially among OTT applications, thus, prioritization should be applied at OTT application ﬂow level, while fairness should be guaranteed at OSP level, as dictated by the network neutrality rules [6].
The VS allocation for OSPs can be challenging for the MNOs with respect to the energy efﬁciency of the shared network infrastructure. The use of OTT applications may induce additional energy cost when resources are allocated to the UEs, e.g., OTT voice calls result in high signaling overhead [7]. Aiming to restrain the mobile network’s energy consumption, various energy saving strategies have been proposed. The MNOs may opt to switch off underutilized eNBs in order to reduce the energy consumption by means of cooperative [8] or non-cooperative game theory [9], [10]. However, despite that the impact of OSP-oriented resource allocation on the energy efﬁciency can be a motive or impediment for MNOOSP cooperation, it has not been extensively studied yet.
The VSs encompass resources of the core network (CN), i.e., bandwidth in CN links, and the radio access network (RAN), i.e., spectrum. Hence, end-to-end resources are allocated to ﬂows [11]. RAN resource scheduling periodically allocates spectrum to UEs, in VS allocation rounds, according to network-related parameters (e.g., congestion of links, cellular links’ channel conditions, etc.), and MNOs’ performance goals (e.g., maximization of spectral efﬁciency, etc.). Given the periodicity of resource allocation process and the dynamic number of ﬂows concurrently requesting resources, ﬂows may not receive resources in each round, experiencing time delay during their service time. Moreover, when OSPs’ policies are considered, the shared network coordinator (e.g., a centralized controller) should periodically interact with the OSPs. As

978-1-5386-3180-5/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

information about the ﬂows needs to be conveyed from the RAN to the OSPs and vice versa, the CN links may also experience congestion, increasing the overall delay, i.e., the time needed for the reception of resources by the ﬂows, as arranged by the RAN scheduling scheme, and the time required for the transmission of ﬂows’ information through the CN.
Most resource allocation approaches refer to RAN resources of a single evolved NodeB base station (eNB) [12], or a RAN where eNBs and/or spectrum resources are shared among MNOs [13]. Other resource management schemes refer to virtual MNOs (MVNOs) that do not own spectrum or infrastructure. MVNOs can adjust their resource allocation demands to the MNOs’ pricing strategies reaching a Stackelberg equilibrium [14], increase their beneﬁt using market equilibrium theory [15] or declare preferences over VSs using matching theory [3]. Although the schemes for MVNOs could potentially apply to OSPs, novel resource management schemes are required, as these schemes do not consider the OSPs’ policies and the network neutrality issue that arises when ﬂows with different priorities access the network. Also, the OSPs may have dynamic preferences over resources that are not expressed by strictly deﬁned utility functions required by the existing approaches, and may entail intractable combinatorial problems. The matching theory can facilitate the interaction among MNOs and OSPs without yielding optimization problems of high complexity [16]. Even though the approaches for MNOs or MVNOs can be applied periodically as scheduling techniques, no insights for the additional delay they may induce are provided. The fact that end-to-end resources are allocated to the ﬂows has not been studied as a factor that could affect the performance of the proposed schemes.
In this paper, motivated by the deﬁciencies of the existing approaches and the importance of satisfying the QoS of the OTT applications, we introduce a novel method that enables the intervention of OSPs in the VS allocation process with the aid of matching theory, which allows the OSPs to express interest for resources. The contribution of this work is twofold:
(i) Design of an efﬁcient matching theoretic ﬂow prioritization (MTFP) algorithm: We introduce a novel resource allocation algorithm that allows the OSPs to i) declare their preferences over the network resources in each VS allocation round, exploiting the distributed nature of matching theory, and ii) manage their user prioritization policies, without violating the network neutrality rules.
(ii) Extensive assessment of the performance of MTFP algorithm in terms of induced delay and energy efﬁciency of the mobile network: We investigate the average delay experienced by the ﬂows and the energy efﬁciency of the shared mobile network when the MTFP algorithm is employed, considering different OTT application trafﬁc levels and VS allocation frequencies.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The system model is described in Section II and, in Section III, the MTFP algorithm is presented. The simulation results are discussed in Section IV. In Section V conclusions are drawn.
II. NETWORK ARCHITECTURE AND SYSTEM MODEL We next describe the architecture of a shared LTE–A network and the considered system model.
A. Shared LTE-A network In the shared LTE-A network of Fig. 1, different MNOs
manage cooperatively the RAN elements e.g., collocated

Fig. 1: Considered shared LTE-A network
eNBs, spectrum resource blocks (RBs) and the CN elements connected to RAN, e.g., routers. The resource management is performed using the software deﬁned networking (SDN) framework that offers a virtualization controller (VC) [17]. For the interaction with the VC, suitable network application programming interfaces (APIs) are provided (MNOs’ and OSPs’ APIs). In the RAN, the spectrum of each eNB is sliced and the VSs offered to OSPs include sets of RBs. The resource scheduling process is performed periodically, in VS allocation rounds, with a frequency determined by the network’s capabilities and congestion levels, allowing the transmission of the UEs’ information from RAN to VC and the exchange of the required information between OSPs and VC. This process may last longer than the regular resource scheduling performed per transmission time interval (TTI). In the CN, the aggregation of the ﬂows’ information is performed via the available routers. Thus, when VSs are assigned to OSPs, speciﬁc bandwidth is reserved in each CN link.
In order to decide about the required VSs, the OSPs should be aware of the status of the UEs related to the ﬂows, e.g., the downlink channel conditions. Each UE can connect to an eNB and report the channel quality indicator (CQI), which determines the modulation and coding scheme (MCS) used for the downlink transmissions related to the UEs’ ﬂows. The VC can provide the information about ﬂows to the OSPs’ APIs, allowing the OSPs to estimate the QoS levels using the metrics they prefer and adjust their requirements regarding the VSs.
B. System model We consider the cell of a shared RAN jointly operated by
N MNOs with co-located eNBs (Fig. 2). Each MNO owns an eNB n ∈ N and spectrum, shared with the other MNOs. A number of W RBs is available, whereas U UEs are subscribers of either of the MNOs. A set of M OSPs may co-exist in the network. Each UE generates ﬂows related to different OTT applications, thus, each ﬂow corresponds to a speciﬁc UE and OSP. Assuming a set of J ﬂows and m a speciﬁc OSP, we denote J (m) the set of ﬂows related to the OSP m. A set J(n) of ﬂows is associated with eNB n.
The OSPs’ policies deem each ﬂow to be of higher or lower priority pj. A number of K priority classes exists. Flows belonging to different OTT applications may have different priorities, even when the ﬂows are related to the same UE. The ﬂows are generated by U UEs following a Poisson distribution

Fig. 2: VS allocation in the considered network

with rate λ (ﬂows/UE). The mean duration of each ﬂow is exponentially distributed with mean equal to 1/µ. Each OSP needs to acquire a set of RBs in order to serve the ﬂows that are
associated with UEs in either of the available eNBs. The VC allocates vm RBs to the VS that corresponds to OSP m ∈ M. Each ﬂow j ∈ J (m) ⊂ J needs a number of vn(m,j) ≤ vm RBs that provides it with a downlink data rate rs(rmv ,j).
A UE that generates ﬂows can report CQIs to each eNB n in every TTI [12]. Given an MCS(nm,j) and a number of allocated RBs vn(m,j) to the UE related to ﬂow j, the achievable downlink data rate is given by:

L rn(m,j) =

MCS(nm,j), vn(m,j) TTI

,

(1)

where the transport block size L(MCSn(m,j), vn(m,j)) can be found as in [3]. The value MCS(nm,j) may be different in each round for a speciﬁc UE. Assuming downlink channels with
Rayleigh fading, the Signal–to–Noise Ratio (SNR) is a random variable with average value γ and probability density function:

f (x)

=

1 γ

e−

x γ

u(x),

(2)

where u(x) is the unit step function and [γt(hi)r, γt(hi+r 1)] is the SNR range that corresponds to MCS i.
The VS allocation is performed periodically in successive VS allocation rounds. The OSPs request RBs on behalf of their ﬂows in a VS allocation step exponentially distributed with mean value E [t]. While a UE’s connection to an OTT application is active, the corresponding ﬂow experiences several VS allocation rounds. However, in each round, RBs may or may not be allocated to a ﬂow, thus, it experiences an average delay E [D], due to the time spent in fruitless rounds.
The network energy efﬁciency is affected by the total data rate demand in each eNB, i.e., the number of served ﬂows and their data rate requirements, and the channel conditions of the

UEs, i.e., the total number of RBs used by the corresponding
eNBs. Using Eq. (1), we deﬁne the energy efﬁciency ηn per eNB n in a VS allocation round as:

ηn =

m∈M

j∈J (m)∩J(n) rn(m,j) , Pn

(3)

where the power consumption Pn of eNB n is equal to [18]:

Pn = PC(n) + δPR(nB),

(4)

considering, for each eNB n, the constant power consumption PC(n) related to signal processing, cooling and battery backup, the power consumption δ that scales with the average radiated power due to ampliﬁer and feeder losses and the power consumption PR(nB) for the transmission of one RB. Given W available RBs, the transmission power PT(nx) and an the number of antennas of eNB n, the value PR(nB) is calculated as:

PR(nB)

=

PT(nx) anW

.

(5)

Using Eq. (3), we derive the overall network efﬁciency as:

E [η] =

n∈N
|N |

ηn

,

(6)

assuming a number of N eNBs in the shared network.

III. MATCHING THEORETIC FLOW PRIORITIZATION We thereupon describe the VS allocation problem for OSPs and propose a matching theoretic ﬂow prioritization algorithm.

A. VS allocation and involved parties’ preferences The VS allocation involves the assignment of RBs to each
ﬂow according to the CQI and MCS values of the UE related to each ﬂow, and the required QoS levels, i.e., acceptable data rate and ﬂow priority, as deﬁned by the corresponding OSP’s policy. At each VS allocation round, each OSP m requests RBs in the eNBs that offer the requested downlink data rates
j∈J (m) rs(rmv ,j) and aims to minimize the GoSm, deﬁned as the ratio of the number of ﬂows that do not achieve the required data rate with the allocated resources over the total number of ﬂows J (m) and estimated as:

GoSm

=

1−

|J

1 (m)|

[rn(m,j)(vn(j,)m) ≥ rs(rmv ,j)], (7)

j∈J (m) n∈N

The allocation of RBs may not be possible for all ﬂows at each VS allocation round. Each OSP prefers that ﬂows with higher priority, i.e., lower pj value, receive the required RBs ﬁrst in each round, ensuring that they experience lower delay than ﬂows of lower priority. Among ﬂows with the same priority, those that have lower demands of RBs, e.g., experience better channel conditions or have lower data rate demands, should be served ﬁrst, increasing the number of ﬂows that can be served.
The MNOs are interested in minimizing the expected number of ﬂows of all OSPs that do not achieve the required data rates, deﬁned as expected GoS E [GoS], respecting the priorities deﬁned by the OSPs, without violating the network neutrality rules. The value E [GoS] is equal to:

GoSm

E [GoS]

=

m∈M
|M|

.

(8)

Flows with lower priorities may be lead to starvation, as the RBs may not be sufﬁcient. Hence, the eNBs update the priorities depending on whether each ﬂow has previously received resources or not, respecting the OSPs’ policies and ensuring that all ﬂows receive resources at some point. The higher the priority of a ﬂow, the more likely it is that it receives resources in a round, experiencing lower delay.
B. Formulation of matching process using contracts In VS allocation, the ﬂows offer contracts, whereas eNBs
rank the offered contracts. Each contract is a combination of parameters that associate a ﬂow with an eNB, i.e., the ﬂow’s priority and the RBs required for achieving the desired QoS in a speciﬁc eNB. A ﬂow must be associated with exactly one eNB and an eNB serves multiple ﬂows (many-to-one matching). A contract c related to ﬂow j and eNB n is represented by a vector (j, n, q), where q is the cost of contract q = (pj, vn(m,j)) that is deﬁned as a real number with the integer part equal to the ﬂow’s priority pj and a decimal part equal to the RBs vn(m,j) required by the UE related to ﬂow j in order to achieve rs(rmv ,j), when the UE is connected to eNB n, as given by Eq. (1). A ﬂow ranks the contracts by ascending q value, as this will provide it with higher priority in resource allocation, increasing its chances of receiving RBs and reducing the experienced delay. Moreover, each eNB aims at establishing contracts with ﬂows at the minimum possible cost q. Among ﬂows of the same priority, those with lower resource demands (fewer RBs) are preferred. The accepted contracts conﬁrm the agreement between ﬂows and eNBs and form the chosen set, whereas the rest of the contracts form the rejected set. We denote as C the set of all possible contracts.
Deﬁnition 1. Given the set of all possible contracts C and C′ ⊂ C a subset of C, the chosen set Sj(C′) of a ﬂow j either contains only one element (the ﬂow’s preferred contract out of C′) or is empty, if there is no acceptable contract c in C′ for ﬂow j. Similarly, the chosen set Sn(C′) of an eNB n either contains the eNB’s preferred contracts out of C′ or is empty, if there is no acceptable contract c in C′ for eNB n.
The remaining options from the set of contracts that are not accepted from anyone form the set of rejected contracts.
Deﬁnition 2. Given the set of all possible contracts C, a subset C′ of C, and SJ (C′) = ∪j∈J Sj(C′) and SN (C′) = ∪n∈N Sn(C′) the chosen sets of all ﬂows and eNBs, respectively, the sets of contracts that are rejected by all ﬂows and all eNBs are deﬁned as RF (C′) = C′\SJ (C′) and RN (C′) = C′\SN (C′). The rejected sets of a ﬂow j and an eNB n are deﬁned as Rj(C′) and Rn(C′), respectively.
At the end of the matching procedure, a stable association between eNBs and ﬂows is achieved, if there can be no allocation strictly preferred by any eNB and there exists no ﬂow that would prefer to reject the contract it has received.
Deﬁnition 3. A set of contracts C′ ⊂ C results in a stable VS allocation if and only if
(i) SN (C′) = SJ (C′) = C′ (individual rationality) (ii) there exists no eNB n ∈ N and set of contracts C′′ =
Sn(C′) such that C′′ = Sn(C′ ∪ C′′) ⊂ SJ (C′ ∪ C′′) (nonexistence of blocking contracts).
The ﬁrst condition dictates that if only the contracts in C′

are available, then they are all chosen. When the condition does not hold, it means that there exist a ﬂow or eNB that prefers to reject a contract. The second condition imposes that there exist no set of contracts C′′ that could be added and would be selected by both eNB n and the ﬂows related to n.
The property of substitutability for the eNBs’ preferences is a sufﬁcient condition for achieving a stable allocation [16]:
Deﬁnition 4. The contracts in C are substitutes for eNB n ∈ N , if for all subsets C′ ⊂ C′′ ⊂ C, it holds that Rn(C′) ⊂ Rn(C′′), where Rn is the set of contracts rejected by n.
According to the property of substitutability of eNBs’ preferences over contracts, every contract rejected from C′ is also rejected from C′′, and if a contract is chosen by an eNB from some available contracts, then that contract will still be selected from any smaller set that includes it.
C. Proposed matching algorithm We present a matching theoretic ﬂow prioritization (MTFP)
algorithm that matches the ﬂows accessing a shared network with the eNBs’ resources, considering the ﬂows’ priorities and can be applied in each VS allocation round.
Algorithm 1 consists of two phases (i.e., initialization and negotiation) that take place in each VS allocation round. During the initialization phase, all UEs report their CQIs and each eNB transmits this information to the VC. The OSPs update the information about the ﬂows’ priorities and required QoS. In the negotiation phase, at each matching iteration, the ﬂows start ranking their preferences over the available set of contracts, according to the priorities set by their OSPs, and submit their requests for assignment to the most preferred contracts with the corresponding eNBs using the VC. The eNBs update the ﬂows’ priorities and sort the available contracts. Therefore, two sets of contracts are created. The ﬁrst set is the chosen set SN of contracts, which contains the most preferred contracts based on the OSPs’ preferences. The second set is the rejected set RN of contracts, which is the complement of the chosen set. The negotiation phase is repeated while the rejected ﬂows submit requests for assignment to their next preferred set of contracts, until no more requests are added to the rejected set RN . Once contracts are ﬁnalized, the VSs for all OSPs are created and the requested RBs are allocated to each eNB.
Proposition 1. The MTFP algorithm converges to a stable eNB-ﬂow matching after a ﬁnite number of iterations.
Proof: The number of possible contracts that can be allocated is ﬁnite. The algorithm converges when no more ﬂows are added to RN , thus every ﬂow is associated with an eNB through a contract and the property of substitutability (Deﬁnition 4) characterizes the eNBs’ preferences.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION We study the performance of the MTFP algorithm in terms of delay and energy efﬁciency considering different scenarios and the settings described in Section IV-A. The simulation results are discussed in Section IV-B.
A. Simulation Setup We consider the network in Fig. 2 with N = 2 MNOs and
|M| = 2 OSPs, e.g, YouTube or Skype. Each OSP has |K| = 2 priority classes, i.e., a high priority class of premium users requesting 1 Mb/s downlink data rate and a low priority class, i.e., free users, requesting 0.5 Mb/s. High priority characterizes

Algorithm 1 Matching theoretic ﬂow prioritization (MTFP) algorithm
Input: CQIs of UEs, rate constraints and priorities of ﬂows Output: Stable allocation per VS allocation round
Initialization phase: -The UEs with active ﬂows submit their CQIs to eNBs. -The eNBs submit the ﬂows’ information to VC. -Each OSP m checks each ﬂow’s j status and assigns the priorities pj and requested data rate rs(rmv ,j). Negotiation phase: // Start matching iterations Repeat: -The ﬂows estimate the RBs required at each eNB n and sort the available contracts c ∈ C according to cost q ∈ Q. -Each ﬂow j ∈ J creates the chosen set Sj(C′) and the rejected set Rj(C′) = C′\Sj(C′), C′ ⊂ C. -Each eNB n ∈ N updates the priorities of ﬂows served in the previous round (pj = initial pj + 1). -Each ﬂow with Rj(C′) = ∅ submits the next preferred contract from Sj(C′) to the VC. -The eNBs check if the ﬂows that submit contracts have been previously served: ∀ ﬂow j ∈ J : if ﬂow j rejected in the previous round then
Set pj = initial pj. end if -Each eNB n accepts most preferred contracts and rejects the others, creating the chosen set Sn(C′) and the rejected set Rn(C′) = C′\Sn(C′), C′ ⊂ C. Until convergence to a stable allocation. -The VC allocates RBs considering the number of available RBs W and transmits the required information to eNBs.

(a) Delay vs. number of UEs

50% of the ﬂows. Three modulation schemes (QPSK, 16-QAM and 64-QAM) and W = 100 RBs are available, whereas U UEs (U/2 per MNO), generate ﬂows following a Poisson distribution with rate λ (ﬂows/hour/UE). Each ﬂow has an exponentially distributed duration with 1/µ = 180 s. The mean step value E [t] is set to 50 ms and 100 ms, simulating different CN congestion levels. We set PC(n) = 354.44 W, PT(nx) = 46 dBm, δ = 21.45 and an = 2 ∀n ∈ N [18]. Given the lack of approaches that perform resource allocation for OSPs in shared network, we compare the MTFP algorithm with a best effort (BE) approach that allocates randomly the RBs to the ﬂows. In a simulation period of two hours, we study the effect of different numbers of UEs and OTT ﬂow generation rates on delay and energy efﬁciency, comparing the MTFP algorithm with the BE approach and using different step values.
B. Simulation Results We study the effect of number of connected UEs on the
delay experienced by the ﬂows, using the MTFP and BE approaches, considering U = {100, 200, . . . , 500} UEs.
As shown in Fig. 3 (a), the increase of the number of UEs leads to higher experienced delay, as more ﬂows compete for resources. Still, MTFP achieves lower delay than BE, reaching a reduction of 137% and 112% for step values of 50 and 100 ms (U = 500), respectively, as RBs are allocated in a way that the highest possible number of ﬂows are accommodated in each VS allocation round. In contrast, BE does not consider the OSPs’ policies and allocates randomly the RBs to the ﬂows.

(b) Energy efﬁciency vs. number of UEs
Fig. 3: Effect of number of connected UEs
We also observe that, for both schemes, the delay is higher when the step value increases, reaching values up to 47% and 30% higher for MTFP and BE (U = 100), respectively. As the information exchange takes longer to be completed, each round lasts longer and the impact of lost rounds on the delay is higher, increasing the average experienced delay.
In Fig. 3(b), we see that MTFP outperforms the BE approach in terms of energy efﬁciency, reaching 93% and 96% increase, for step equal to 50 and 100 ms, respectively (U = 100). With MTFP, RBs are allocated in accordance with the ﬂows’ downlink channel conditions and QoS demands and the total data rate increases, improving the energy efﬁciency. As eNBs are always active and no switching off scheme is applied, i.e., Pn (Eq. (3)) is always considered, it is more efﬁcient that more ﬂows are served by each eNB n.
We next focus on the effect of different ﬂow generation rates, assuming U = 500 UEs and λ = {2, 4, 6, 8} ﬂows/hour/UE. In Fig. 4(a), we observe that for both approaches, higher number of ﬂows induces higher delay, as more ﬂows concurrently request RBs in each round. As expected, the increase of step value affects the delay negatively. However, MTFP still performs better, resulting in delay values

(a) Delay vs. OTT ﬂow generation rate
(b) Energy efﬁciency vs. OTT ﬂow generation rate
Fig. 4: Effect of OTT ﬂow generation rate
121% − 138% and 48% − 91% lower than those of BE, for the step values of 50 ms and 100 ms, respectively.
Figure 4(b) shows that MTFP increases the energy efﬁciency by 74% and 76% (λ = 8) for step=50 and 100 ms, respectively, comparing to BE. Also, as λ increases, the energy efﬁciency improvement attenuates, as more RBs become occupied, providing the highest total data rate that is feasible per VS allocation round. With MTFP and λ > 4, although the higher step value (100 ms) produces higher delay (Fig. 4(a)), it improves the energy efﬁciency up to 26% (λ = 8), as it leads to fewer rounds with low RB utilization.
V. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, a matching theoretic ﬂow prioritization (MTFP) algorithm has been presented. Considering the network characteristics, i.e., different numbers of UEs generating ﬂows, ﬂow generation rates and VS allocation steps, we have extensively studied the performance of MTFP. The MTFP algorithm achieves lower delay and higher energy efﬁciency, compared to a best-effort scheme. In high data trafﬁc cases, the longer duration of VS allocation rounds increases the delay but improves the energy efﬁciency. We believe that our work

provides useful insights for network resource management that respects network neutrality and QoS demands without inﬂating the energy consumption of the mobile network.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work has been supported by the research projects SPOT5G (TEC2017-87456-P), SEMIoTICS (780315) and CASPER (645393).
REFERENCES
[1] “Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Trafﬁc Forecast Update, 2016–2021,” 2017.
[2] R. Bassoli, M. Di Renzo, and F. Granelli, “Analytical Energy-efﬁcient Planning of 5G Cloud Radio Access Network,” in IEEE International Conf. on Commun., 2017, pp. 1–4.
[3] E. Datsika, A. Antonopoulos, N. Zorba, and C. Verikoukis, “Matching Game Based Virtualization in Shared LTE-A Networks,” in IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[4] A. Ahmad, A. Floris, and L. Atzori, “QoE-centric Service Delivery: A Collaborative Approach among OTTs and ISPs,” Computer Networks, vol. 110, pp. 168–179, 2016.
[5] P. Di Francesco, J. Kibiłda, F. Malandrino, N. J. Kaminski, and L. A. DaSilva, “Sensitivity Analysis on Service-Driven Network Planning,” IEEE Trans. on Networking, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 1417–1430, June 2017.
[6] A. Antonopoulos, E. Kartsakli, C. Perillo, and C. Verikoukis, “Shedding Light on the Internet: Stakeholders and Network Neutrality,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 216–223, May 2017.
[7] M. Yan, C. A. Chan, W. Li, C. L. I, S. Bian, A. F. Gygax, C. Leckie, K. Hinton, E. Wong, and A. Nirmalathas, “Network Energy Consumption Assessment of Conventional Mobile Services and Over-the-Top Instant Messaging Applications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 3168–3180, Dec. 2016.
[8] M. A. Marsan and M. Meo, “Energy Efﬁcient Management of Two Cellular Access Networks,” ACM SIGMETRICS Performance Evaluation Review, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 69–73, 2010.
[9] B. Leng, P. Mansourifard, and B. Krishnamachari, “Microeconomic Analysis of Base-Station Sharing in Green Cellular Networks,” in IEEE Conf. on Comp. Commun., Apr. 2014, pp. 1132–1140.
[10] A. Bousia, E. Kartsakli, A. Antonopoulos, L. Alonso, and C. Verikoukis, “Game-theoretic Infrastructure Sharing in Multioperator Cellular Networks,” IEEE Trans. on Vehicular Technology, vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 3326–3341, May 2016.
[11] A. Gudipati, D. Perry, Li E. Li, and S. Katti, “SoftRAN: Software Deﬁned Radio Access Network,” in ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Hot Topics in Software Deﬁned Networking, Aug. 2013, pp. 25–30.
[12] F. Capozzi, G. Piro, L. A. Grieco, G. Boggia, and P. Camarda, “Downlink Packet Scheduling in LTE Cellular Networks: Key Design Issues and a Survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 678–700, Second 2013.
[13] M. Srinivasan, V. J. Kotagi, and C. S. R. Murthy, “A Q-Learning Framework for User QoE Enhanced Self-Organizing Spectrally Efﬁcient Network Using a Novel Inter-Operator Proximal Spectrum Sharing,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 2887–2901, Nov. 2016.
[14] T. D. Tran and L. B. Le, “Stackelberg Game Approach for Wireless Virtualization Design in Wireless Networks,” in IEEE International Conf. on Commun., 2017, pp. 1–6.
[15] G. Zhang, K. Yang, J. Wei, K. Xu, and P. Liu, “Virtual Resource Allocation for Wireless Virtualization Networks using Market Equilibrium Theory,” in IEEE INFOCOM WKSHPS, Apr. 2015, pp. 366–371.
[16] J. W. Hatﬁeld and P. R. Milgrom, “Matching with Contracts,” The American Economic Review, vol. 95, no. 4, pp. 913–935, 2005.
[17] A. Nakao, P. Du, Y. Kiriha, F. Granelli, A. A. Gebremariam, T. Taleb, and M. Bagaa, “End-to-end Network Slicing for 5G Mobile Networks,” Journal of Inf. Processing, vol. 25, pp. 153–163, 2017.
[18] F. Richter, A. J. Fehske, and G. P. Fettweis, “Energy Efﬁciency Aspects of Base Station Deployment Strategies for Cellular Networks,” in IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf. Fall, Sept. 2009, pp. 1–5.

